Problem 13.2. A metric theory (devised by Nordström in 1913) relates $\mathbf{g}_{\mu \nu}$ to $\mathbf{T}_{\mu \nu}$ by the equations
$$
\mathrm {C} _ {\mu \nu \rho \sigma} = 0
$$
$$
\mathrm {R} = \kappa \mathrm {g} _ {\mu \nu} \mathrm {T} ^ {\mu \nu},
$$
where $\mathbf{C}$ is the Weyl tensor. Show that this theory, in the Newtonian limit and with the proper choice of $\kappa$ , agrees with Newtonian gravitation theory, but that this theory predicts no deflection of starlight passing near the Sun. Does this theory agree with the Pound-Rebka experiments, i.e. are photons redshifted as they rise against the gravitational pull near the surface of the Earth?

## Solution

Solution 13.2. The vanishing of the Weyl tensor allows us to write the metric in the conformally flat form
$$
\mathbf {g} _ {\mu \nu} = \mathbf {e} ^ {2 \phi} \eta_ {\mu \nu}
$$
where $\phi \ll 1$ in the Newtonian limit (nearly flat spacetime). We have then (see Problem 9.19)
$$
\textbf {R} \approx - 6 \nabla^ {2} \phi .
$$
For nonrelativistic stress energies $\mathbf{T}_{\mu}^{\mu} \approx \mathbf{T}_{0}^{0} \approx -\rho$ and the field equations become
$$
- 6 \phi_ {, \alpha \beta} \eta^ {\alpha \beta} = \kappa \mathbf {T} = - \kappa \rho .
$$
In the Newtonian limit time variations will be slow compared to spatial variations (in $c = 1$ units) so we have
$$
6 \phi_ {, i j} \delta^ {i j} = \kappa \rho .
$$
For $\kappa = 24\pi$ this is the usual Newtonian equation for the Newtonian potential $\phi$ . The solution to Problem 12.11 implies that Newtonian trajectories are geodesics in a geometry with $g_{00} \approx -(1 + 2\phi)$ . Thus in the Newtonian limit the proposed theory agrees with Newtonian theory and $\phi$ plays the role of the Newtonian potential.
For the metric of a massive object like the sun the function $\phi$ must fall off far from the object where spacetime approaches flatness. To see that light is not deflected we need only notice [see Problem 9.18] that the null geodesics of $\mathbf{g}_{\mu \nu} = \mathrm{e}^{2\phi}\eta_{\mu \nu}$ are identical to the null geodesics of $\eta_{\mu \nu}$ , which are certainly not deflected by the massive object. Thus when we compare, in the asymptotically flat distant regions, the directions of a photon's motion before and after it interacts with the massive object, we will observe no deflection.
Near the earth's surface the metric is of the form
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = \mathrm {e} ^ {2 \phi (z)} (- \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \mathrm {d x} ^ {2} + \mathrm {d y} ^ {2} + \mathrm {d z} ^ {2})
$$
where $z$ corresponds to height above the surface. If particles are to fall with the proper acceleration we must have $\phi \approx -gz$ . From the geodesic equation we find that for the energy of a photon moving vertically
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} p ^ {0}}{\mathrm {d} z} = - \Gamma_ {0 z} ^ {0} p ^ {0} = - \phi_ {, z} p ^ {0}.
$$
Thus a photon loses energy at the same rate as a particle and the proposed theory agrees with Pound-Rebka experiment, as any theory based on geodesic motion must.