Problem 12.3. If the amplitude of solid-earth tides as a function of time is fourier transformed, there are peaks at certain frequencies. What are the frequencies (or periods) of the 10 strongest peaks?

## Solution

Solution 12.3. To good approximation the solid earth responds linearly to the tidal driving force of the Riemann tensor. (This is not true for the hydrodynamic ocean tides.) Thus the fourier spectrum of the earth tides will be the same as that of the Riemann tensor at earth. Since (in Newtonian order at least) the tidal force is linear in its sources we can treat the sun and moon separately. The gravitational potential of a mass M at a position x, y, z in geocentric coordinates is
$$
U = M / \left(x ^ {2} + y ^ {2} + z ^ {2} \right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}}.
$$
The Newtonian components of the Riemann tensor are thus
$$
\begin{array}{l} R _ {x 0 x 0} = \partial^ {2} U / \partial x ^ {2} = \frac {M}{r ^ {3}} \left(\frac {3 x ^ {2}}{r ^ {2}} - 1\right) \tag {1} \\ R _ {x 0 y 0} = \partial^ {2} U / \partial x \partial y = \frac {M}{r ^ {3}} \left(\frac {3 x y}{r ^ {2}}\right) \\ \end{array}
$$
etc. for yy, zz, yz, xz. In the frame of the rotating earth, the apparent orbit of the sun or moon is given by the standard formula of Keplerian spherical astronomy (see e.g. MTW, p. 648)
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathrm {x} = \mathrm {r} \cos (\bar {\omega} + \mathrm {v}) \cos \phi \mathrm {t} - \mathrm {r} \sin (\bar {\omega} + \mathrm {v}) \cos \epsilon \sin \phi \mathrm {t} \\ \mathrm {y} = \mathrm {r} \sin (\bar {\omega} + \mathrm {v}) \cos \epsilon \cos \phi \mathrm {t} + \mathrm {r} \cos (\bar {\omega} + \mathrm {v}) \sin \phi \mathrm {t} \\ z = r \sin (\bar {\omega} + v) \sin \epsilon . \tag {2} \\ \end{array}
$$
Here $\overline{\omega}$ and $\epsilon$ are constants, the longitude of perigee and inclination to the equatorial plane, respectively. The angle $\phi t$ is the hour angle of the rotating earth,
$$
\phi t = \frac {2 \pi}{1 \text {s i d e r e a l} \text {d a y}} t
$$
r is the "radius vector" and v is the "true anomaly," given by
$$
r = a (1 - e \cos E), \quad \cos v = (\cos E - e) (1 - e \cos E) ^ {- 1}
$$
where $a$ is the semimajor axis, $e$ is the eccentricity and $E$ is the eccentric anomaly defined by
$$
E - e \sin E = \frac {2 \pi}{T} t \equiv \Omega t
$$
and where $\mathbf{T}$ is the period of the orbit. Working only to first order in the (small) eccentricity $e$ , we compute
$$
\mathbf {E} = \boldsymbol {\Omega} t + e \sin \boldsymbol {\Omega} t
$$
$$
\cos E = \cos \Omega t - e \sin^ {2} \Omega t \tag {3}
$$
$$
r ^ {- 3} = a ^ {- 3} (1 + 3 e \cos \Omega t) \tag {3}
$$
$$
\cos v = \cos \Omega t + e \cos 2 \Omega t - e.
$$
Now substituting Equation (3) into Equation (2) and substituting the result into Equation (1), we get
$$
R _ {j 0 k 0} = \frac {M}{a ^ {3}} \times (\text {c o n s t a n t - t e r m s} + \text {t i m e v a r i e n g t e r m s});
$$
the generic time-varying term has the form (here scos means either cos or sin and an exponent mN means any integer between zero and m inclusive)
$$
\begin{array}{l} \text {i n c l u s i v e)} \\ 3 (\text {s c o s} ^ {2} \Omega t - 2 \text {e s c o s} \Omega t + 2 \text {e s c o s} \Omega t \text {s c o s} 2 \Omega t) \times \left\{ \begin{array}{l} \sin^ {2} \epsilon \quad \text {o r} \\ \sin \epsilon \cos^ {\mathbf {N}} \epsilon \text {s c o s} \phi t \quad \text {o r} \\ \cos^ {2} \mathbf {N} \epsilon \text {s c o s} ^ {2} \phi t. \end{array} \right. \end{array}
$$
This expression is analyzed into individual frequencies by repeated use of the trigonometric identities for products of scos's in terms of sum and difference frequencies. The following components result:
Angular Frequency
(i) 2φ
(ii)
(iii) $2\Omega \pm 2\phi$
(iv) $2\Omega \pm \phi$
(v) 2Ω
(vi) $\Omega \pm 2\phi$
(vii) $\Omega \pm \phi$
(viii) 0
(ix) $3\Omega \pm 2\phi$
(x) $3\Omega \pm \phi$
(xi) 3Ω
Amplitudes (leading order in e)   
<table><tr><td>3/4 cos2Nε</td></tr><tr><td>3/2 sin ε cosNε</td></tr><tr><td>3/8 cos2Nε</td></tr><tr><td>3/4 sin ε cosNε</td></tr><tr><td>3/2 sin2ε and 3/4 cos2Nε</td></tr><tr><td>3e cos2Nε</td></tr><tr><td>6e sin ε cosNε</td></tr><tr><td>6e(sin2ε or 1/2 cos2Nε)</td></tr><tr><td>3/2 e cos2Nε</td></tr><tr><td>3e sin ε cosNε</td></tr><tr><td>3e sin2ε</td></tr></table>
For the Earth-Sun system: $\epsilon = 23\frac{1}{2}^{\circ}$ , $\mathbf{e} = .017$ , $\Omega = 2\pi / 1$ year, and $\phi = 2\pi / 1$ sidereal day. For the Earth-Moon system $\mathbf{e} = .054$ , $\Omega = 2\pi / 1$ sidereal month, $\phi = 2\pi / 1$ sidereal day, and $\epsilon$ varies between $23\frac{1}{2}^{\circ} \pm 5^{\circ}$ due to the 18.6 year nutation of the moon's node. (This induces further splitting of the spectrum that we have neglected.) With these values, and using the fact that $(\mathbb{M} / \mathfrak{a}^{3})$ is 2.2 times larger for the moon's orbit than for the sun's, we get the following estimate for the ordering of former components by strength ( $\mathbb{M} = \text{moon}$ , $\mathbb{S} = \text{sun}$ ):
M(i), M(v), M(ii), M(iii), S(i), S(v), M(iv), S(ii), S(iii), M(vi), M(viii)…