Problem 1.23. Suppose in some inertial frame S a photon has 4-momentum components
$$
\mathbf {p} ^ {0} = \mathbf {p} ^ {\mathbf {x}} = \mathbf {E}, \quad \mathbf {p} ^ {\mathbf {y}} = \mathbf {p} ^ {\mathbf {z}} = 0.
$$
There is a special class of Lorentz transformations - called the "little group of $\mathbf{p}$ " - which leave the components of $\mathbf{p}$ unchanged, e.g. a pure rotation through an angle $\alpha$ in the $y-z$ plane
$$
\left[ \begin{array}{c c c c} 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & \cos \alpha & - \sin \alpha \\ 0 & 0 & \sin \alpha & \cos \alpha \end{array} \right] \left[ \begin{array}{c} E \\ E \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{array} \right] = \left[ \begin{array}{c} E \\ E \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{array} \right]
$$
is such a transformation. Find a sequence of pure boosts and pure rotations whose product is not a pure rotation in the $y-z$ plane, but is in the little group of $p$ .

## Solution

Solution 1.23. Make an arbitrary boost in a direction which lies in the $y-z$ plane. The photon now may have nonvanishing $p^y$ and $p^z$ as well as $p^x$ . A pure rotation lines up the coordinate frame again so that only $p^x$ is nonvanishing, but $p^x$ does not now have its original magnitude. So, make a final boost along $p^x$ either to redshift it or to blueshift it to the original value. Since $E^2 - p^2 = 0$ , $E$ also has its original value. You can easily convince yourself that the product of these transformations is not a pure rotation; there is in general a net boost left over. An example is:
$$
\left[ \begin{array}{c c c c} \gamma^ {\prime} & \gamma^ {\prime} \mathbf {v} ^ {\prime} & 0 & 0 \\ \gamma^ {\prime} \mathbf {v} ^ {\prime} & \gamma^ {\prime} & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{array} \right] \left[ \begin{array}{c c c c} 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & (1 - \mathbf {v} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} & \mathbf {v} & 0 \\ 0 & - \mathbf {v} & (1 - \mathbf {v} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{array} \right] \left[ \begin{array}{c c c c} \gamma & 0 & \gamma \mathbf {v} & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ \gamma \mathbf {v} & 0 & \gamma & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{array} \right] \left[ \begin{array}{c} \mathbf {E} \\ \mathbf {E} \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{array} \right] = \left[ \begin{array}{c} \mathbf {E} \\ \mathbf {E} \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{array} \right],
$$
where $\mathbf{v}'$ is chosen to satisfy the equality