Problem 14.14. The equation for a scalar field, in flat spacetime, is $\Phi_{,\nu}^{\nu} = \rho_{\mathrm{s}}$ where $\rho_{\mathrm{s}}$ is the density of "scalar charge." We are tempted to conclude that in curved spacetime the equation should be
$$
\Phi_ {; \nu} ^ {; \nu} = \rho_ {\mathbf {s}} \tag {1}
$$
but another possible generalization is
$$
\Phi_ {; \nu} ^ {; \nu} - \frac {1}{6} R \Phi = \rho_ {\mathrm {s}} \tag {2}
$$
where $\mathbf{R}$ is the Ricci scalar. (Equation (2) is “conformally invariant” while (1) is not.) Does Equation (2), in principle, violate the strong equivalence principle? Find the influence of the $\mathbf{R}$ term on the force $(\sim \nabla \Phi)$ between two “scalar charged” particles, assuming that $\mathbf{R} = 1 / a^2$ varies very slowly on a laboratory scale. In a practical laboratory experiment what would be the magnitude of such anomalous $\mathbf{R}$ -term forces compared to the ordinary scalar forces?

## Solution

Solution 14.14. In the proposed Equation (2) the term $\frac{1}{6} R\Phi$ is independent of the size of the laboratory in the same way that the $\rho$ term is. In principle then, if we measure the $\Phi$ field we can measure the Ricci curvature; the conformally invariant Equation (2) then violates the spirit of the strong equivalence principle.
To find the anomalous R-term forces between two particles, let us go to the local Lorentz frame in which one of the particles is stationary. The $\Phi$ field due to this stationary particle of charge $\mu_{1}$ satisfies
$$
\Phi_ {, j} ^ {, j} - \frac {1}{6} R \Phi = \mu_ {1} \delta (\mathbf {r}) .
$$
In writing this equation we have assumed a global (or at least laboratory sized) inertial coordinate system. That is, we have ignored aspects of curvature other than the Ricci scalar. Presumably (and in fact) these other aspects of curvature do not violate strong equivalence.
The equation for $\Phi$ has the solution
$$
\Phi = - \frac {\mu_ {1}}{\mathrm {r}} \exp \left\{- \mathrm {r} / a \sqrt {6} \right\}, \quad a = R ^ {- \frac {1}{2}}
$$
so that the force on a particle of charge $\mu_{2}$ is
$$
\begin{array}{l} F ^ {r} = \mu_ {2} \Phi , r = \mu_ {1} \mu_ {2} / r ^ {2} [ 1 + r / \sqrt {6 a} ] \exp \{- r / a \sqrt {6} \} \\ \approx \mu_ {1} \mu_ {2} / \mathrm {r} ^ {2} \left[ 1 + \mathrm {r} ^ {2} / 1 2 \mathrm {a} ^ {2} + \mathcal {O} (\mathrm {r} ^ {3} / \mathrm {a} ^ {3}) \right]. \\ \end{array}
$$
The anomalous R-term force $\approx \mu_1\mu_2 / 12a^2$ is then independent of particle separation, clearly violating the strong equivalence principle.
From the Einstein equations it is clear that the magnitude of the Ricci scalar is of the order of the density of mass-energy, so that the ratio of anomalous forces to “ordinary” scalar forces is
$$
\begin{array}{l} \frac {\mathrm {r} ^ {2}}{1 2 \mathrm {a} ^ {2}} \sim \mathrm {r} ^ {2} \rho_ {\text {m a s s - e n e r g y}} \\ \sim [ r (c m.) ] ^ {2} \left[ \rho / \rho_ {\text {n u c l e a r}} \right] \cdot 1 0 ^ {- 1 4}. \\ \end{array}
$$
Thus, even if the scalar forces are being measured inside matter at nuclear densities, $\rho_{\mathrm{nuclear}} = 10^{14} \mathrm{~g/cm}^3$ , a very large ( $r \sim 100 \mathrm{~km}$ ) matter filled "laboratory" is necessary before the R-term forces become important. In any practical experiment the R-term forces would be miniscule.