Problem 16.29. For pressure free spherically symmetric collapse (see Problem 16.26), show that both $m$ and $\Gamma$ are independent of time. Solve the resulting dynamical equation
$$
\left(\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {r}}{\mathrm {d} \tau}\right) ^ {2} - \frac {2 \mathbf {m} (\mathbf {R})}{\mathbf {\dot {r}}} = \Gamma^ {2} (\mathbf {R}) - 1
$$
in the three physically distinct cases $\Gamma^2 - 1$ greater than, less than, and equal to, zero.

## Solution

Solution 16.29. From the dynamical equation for mass (see Problem 16.26)
$$
\dot{\mathbf{m}}=-4 \pi \mathbf{pr}^{2} \dot{\mathbf{r}}=0
$$
mass is clearly time independent, as is physically obvious. By differentiating the $\Gamma^{2}$ equation in Problem 16.26 we get
$$
2 \Gamma \dot{\Gamma}=2 U \dot{U}+\frac{2 m}{r^{2}} \dot{r}=2 \dot{r}\left(\ddot{r}+\frac{m}{r^{2}}\right)
$$
and using the result of Problem 16.28 we see that $\Gamma$ , too, is time independent.
The dynamical equation for $\mathbf{r}(\mathbf{R},\tau)$ is now a simple first order equation and can be solved parametrically:
Case (i) $\Gamma^{2}-1<0$:
$$
r=\frac{m(b)}{1-\Gamma^{2}}(1+\cos \eta) \tag {1a}
$$
$$
\tau=\frac{\mathrm{m}(\mathrm{b})}{(1-\Gamma^{2})^{\frac{3}{2}}}(\eta+\sin \eta)+\mathrm{F}(\mathrm{b}) \tag {1b}
$$
where $\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{b})$ is an arbitrary function.
$\underline{\text { Case(ii) }} \quad \Gamma^{2}-1=0:$
$$
r=\left\{\frac{3}{2}(m(b))^{\frac{1}{2}}[g(b)-r]\right\}^{\frac{2}{3}} \tag {2}
$$
where $\mathbf{g}(\mathbf{b})$ is an arbitrary function.
$\underline{\text { Case(iii) }} \quad \Gamma^{2}-1>0:$
$$
r=\frac{m(b)}{\Gamma^{2}-1}(\cosh \eta-1) \tag {3a}
$$
$$
\tau=\frac{\mathrm{m}(\mathrm{b})}{\left(\Gamma^{2}-1\right)^{\frac{3}{2}}}(\sinh \eta-\eta)+\mathrm{H}(\mathrm{b}) \tag {3b}
$$
where $\mathbf{H}(\mathbf{b})$ is an arbitrary function.
Note that there are three free functions - i.e. functions that we can choose by choosing the physical situation. By choosing $\mathfrak{m}(\mathfrak{b})$ we can choose the distribution of mass at some initial time and forever after. The integration "constants" $\mathbf{F}(\mathbf{b}), \mathbf{g}(\mathbf{b}), \mathbf{H}(\mathbf{b})$ correspond to the choice of the $\mathbf{r}$ value of each fluid element on an initial hypersurface, i.e. the choice of $\mathbf{r}(\mathbf{b}, t=0)$ .
The choice of $\Gamma^{2}(\mathfrak{b})$ corresponds to the choice of the velocity of a fluid element on an initial hypersurface. By comparison with the equation for a radial geodesic, $\Gamma^{2}-1$ can be thought of as the conserved "energy at $\infty$ ' for the fluid shell. Therefore, it should not be surprising that there are three solution regimes: we can choose to give a fluid shell less than the escape velocity (a), precisely the escape velocity (b), or greater than the escape velocity (c). Note that the sign of t can be reversed in the above solutions so that, for example, solution (c) can correspond to shells falling inward. Note that in general if the three free functions are not chosen carefully, mass shells are going to cross!