Problem 18.5. The radiation reaction forces on a slow-motion, weak field source can be derived from an addition to the Newtonian potential
$$
\Phi^ {\text {r e a c t .}} = \frac {1}{5} X _ {j k} ^ {(5)} x ^ {j} x ^ {k}.
$$
(Cf. W. Burke, J. Math. Phys. 12, 402 (1971); MTW pp. 993.) Here $\mathfrak{X}_{\mathbf{jk}}$ is the reduced quadrupole moment of the source $\mathbf{x}_{\mathbf{jk}} \equiv \int \rho (\mathbf{x}_{\mathbf{j}}\mathbf{x}_{\mathbf{k}} - \frac{1}{3}\delta_{\mathbf{jk}}\mathbf{r}^{2})\mathrm{d}^{3}\mathbf{x}$ at a given time. The superscript (5) indicates the fifth time derivative. From this potential derive expressions for the time-averaged rates at which the source loses energy and angular-momentum, in terms of derivatives of $\mathfrak{X}_{\mathbf{jk}}$ .

## Solution

Solution 18.5. The radiation reaction force on an element of the source is
$$
\mathrm {d F} _ {\mathrm {i}} = - \Phi_ {, \mathrm {i}} \rho \mathrm {d} ^ {3} \mathrm {x}.
$$
The rate at which the source element loses energy is the rate at which the reaction forces do work on the source element: $\mathbf{v}^{\mathrm{i}}\mathbf{d}\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{i}}$ where $\mathbf{v}$ is the velocity of the source element. For the whole source, then
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {E}}{\mathrm {d} t} = - \int \Phi_ {, \mathbf {i}} \mathbf {v} ^ {\mathbf {i}} \rho \mathrm {d} ^ {3} \mathbf {x} = \int \Phi (\mathbf {v} ^ {\mathbf {i}} \rho) _ {, \mathbf {i}} \mathrm {d} ^ {3} \mathbf {x}.
$$
Here we have used Gauss' divergence theorem and evaluated the surface integral on a surface outside the source to obtain the second equality. The equation of continuity tells us that $\nabla \cdot (\underline{\nu}\rho) = -\partial \rho /\partial t$ so
$$
\begin{array}{l} \frac {\mathrm {d} E}{\mathrm {d} t} = - \int \Phi \frac {\partial \rho}{\partial t} d ^ {3} x = - \frac {1}{5} \mathbf {f} _ {j k} ^ {(5)} \frac {\mathrm {d}}{\mathrm {d} t} \int x ^ {j} x ^ {k} \rho d ^ {3} x \\ = - \frac {1}{5} \mathbf {f} _ {\mathrm {j k}} ^ {(5)} \frac {\mathrm {d}}{\mathrm {d t}} \left(\mathbf {f} _ {\mathrm {j k}} + \frac {1}{3} \delta_ {\mathrm {j k}} \int \mathrm {r} ^ {2} \rho \mathrm {d} ^ {3} x\right). \\ \end{array}
$$
Since $\pmb{\mathcal{I}}_{\mathbf{jk}}\delta_{\mathbf{jk}} = 0$ we drop the final term to arrive at
$$
\mathrm {d E} / \mathrm {d t} = - \left(\frac {1}{5}\right) \dot {\mathbf {f}} _ {\mathbf {j k}} ^ {(5)} \dot {\mathbf {f}} _ {\mathbf {j k}}.
$$
Now we time average over several oscillations. Since secular changes in parameters of the source are assumed to be small over the several oscilla-
tions, we have
$$
\frac {1}{\mathrm {T}} \int_ {0} ^ {\mathrm {T}} \mathbf {\ddot {t}} _ {\mathbf {j k}} ^ {(5)} \dot {\mathbf {\ddot {t}}} _ {\mathbf {j k}} \mathrm {d t} \approx \frac {1}{\mathrm {T}} \int_ {0} ^ {\mathrm {T}} \mathbf {\ddot {t}} _ {\mathbf {j k}} \dot {\mathbf {\ddot {t}}} _ {\mathbf {j k}} \mathrm {d t}
$$
and
$$
\frac {d E}{d t} = - \frac {1}{5} <   \underbrace {\cdots} _ {j k} \underbrace {\cdots} _ {j k} >.
$$
To find the rate of loss of angular momentum we use the fact that for an element of the source
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {J}}{\mathrm {d} t} = \text {r a d i a t i o n r e a c t i o n t o r q u e} = \mathbf {r} \times \mathrm {d} \mathbf {F} = - \mathbf {r} \times \nabla \Phi \rho \mathrm {d} ^ {3} \mathbf {x}
$$
and for the whole source
$$
\begin{array}{l} \frac {d J ^ {i}}{d t} = - \varepsilon^ {i j k} \int x ^ {j} \Phi_ {, k} \rho d ^ {3} x \\ = - \varepsilon^ {\mathrm {i j k}} \int \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {j}} \left(\frac {2}{5} \mathbf {f} _ {\mathrm {k m}} ^ {(5)} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {m}}\right) \rho \mathrm {d} ^ {3} \mathbf {x} \\ = - \frac {2}{5} \varepsilon^ {\mathrm {i j k}} \mathbf {F} _ {\mathrm {k m}} ^ {(5)} \int \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {j}} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {m}} \rho \mathrm {d} ^ {3} \mathbf {x} = - \frac {2}{5} \varepsilon^ {\mathrm {i j k}} \mathbf {F} _ {\mathrm {k m}} ^ {(5)} \mathbf {F} _ {\mathrm {j m}}. \\ \end{array}
$$
Time averaging, and integrating (in time) by parts as above gives us
$$
\frac {d J ^ {i}}{d t} = - \frac {2}{5} \varepsilon^ {i j k} <   \ddot {\pi} _ {k m} \ddot {\pi} _ {j m} >.
$$