Problem 17.20. Show that a primordial, rotating, black hole $(\sim 10^{10}$ years old), of mass $\lesssim 10^{15}\mathrm{gm}$ . will have already lost most of its angular momentum to spontaneous quantum emission of photons or gravitons. What fraction of the angular momentum of a $1\mathbf{M}_{\odot}(\sim 10^{33}\mathrm{gm})$ rotating hole would be lost in the same time?

## Solution

Solution 17.20. The energy amplification described in Problems 17.15 and 17.16 corresponds to stimulated emission in quantum-mechanical language. If we know the rate for stimulated emission, we can find the rate for spontaneous emission as follows:
Let $\mathfrak{p}$ be the probability per unit of phase space of the spontaneous emission of a quantum. If we send $\mathbf{N}$ quanta in, the probability of getting $\mathbf{N} + 1$ out by stimulated emission is $(\mathbf{N} + 1)\mathfrak{p}$ , since the quanta (gravitons, photons) are bosons. To simplify the argument, assume $\mathfrak{p} \ll 1$ so we do not have to consider the emission of more than one extra quantum; dimensionally the answer would not be changed if we were to include this refinement. The expectation value of the excess number of quanta emitted is
$$
\begin{array}{l} <   \Delta N > = (\text {e x c e s s n u m b e r}) \times (\text {p r o b a b i l i t y o f t h a t n u m b e r}) \\ = 1 \times (N + 1) p. \\\ \end{array}
$$
The amplification is
$$
\mathrm {A} \equiv \frac {<   \Delta \mathrm {N} >}{\mathrm {N}} = \left(1 + \frac {1}{\mathrm {N}}\right) \mathrm {p} \approx \mathrm {p} \tag {1}
$$
in the classical limit $(\mathbf{N}\rightarrow \infty)$ . Fermi's Golden Rule says that the rate of spontaneous emission is
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} N}{\mathrm {d} t} \sim \int p. \tag {2}
$$
phase space
In Equation (2) replace $p$ by $A$ and recall that the classical effect is described in terms of modes with “quantum numbers” $\ell$ and $m$ and a
frequency $\omega$ . Thus
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathrm {N}}{\mathrm {d} t} \sim \sum_ {\ell , \mathrm {m}} \int \mathrm {A} \mathrm {d} \omega . \tag {3}
$$
Now A goes rapidly to zero for large $\ell$ and m, as in all barrier-penetration problems. Also from Problems 17.15 and 17.16, A is nonzero for $\omega \sim 1 / \mathbb{M}$ over a range $\Delta \omega \sim 1 / \mathbb{M}$ , where M is the mass of the black hole. Since A is a number of order unity for low $\ell$ and m, replace A by 1 in Equation (3) and drop the summation. Then
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {N}}{\mathrm {d} t} \sim \Delta \omega \sim \frac {1}{\mathbf {M}}.
$$
The hole loses energy at a rate
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {E}}{\mathrm {d} t} \sim \hbar \omega \frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {N}}{\mathrm {d} t} \sim \frac {\hbar}{M ^ {2}}.
$$
This implies a loss of angular momentum at a rate
$$
\frac {d J}{d t} \sim \frac {m}{\omega} \frac {d E}{d t} \sim \frac {\hbar}{M}.
$$
Thus the time-scale for angular momentum loss is
$$
\tau \sim J / (d J / d t) \sim M ^ {2} (\pi / M) \sim M ^ {3} / \pi \sim (M / 1 0 ^ {1 5} g m) ^ {3} 1 0 ^ {1 0} \text {y e a r s}.
$$
Thus for $\mathbf{M} \lesssim 10^{15} \mathbf{g}\mathbf{m}$ , $\mathbf{J}$ will already have become essentially zero by this process. For $\mathbf{M} \sim 10^{33} \mathbf{g}\mathbf{m}$ , the fraction lost will be $\sim 10^{-54}$ in $10^{10}$ years.