Problem 18.8. A plane gravitational wave propagates through nearly flat empty spacetime, in the $x^1$ direction (i.e. the metric perturbations $h_{\alpha \beta}$ are functions only of $u = t - x$ ). Give an explicit coordinate transformation which makes all the $h_{\alpha \beta}$ zero except $h_{23} = h_{32}$ and $h_{22} = -h_{33}$ . Show that the same resulting components could have been obtained directly by projection into the transverse traceless gauge.

## Solution

Solution 18.8. The Ricci tensor for the wave must vanish. By contracting the result in Problem 13.13, we have then
$$
0 = 2 \mathrm {R} _ {\mu \nu} = \mathrm {h} _ {\nu , a \mu} ^ {a} + \mathrm {h} _ {\mu , a \nu} ^ {a} - \mathrm {h} _ {\mu \nu} ^ {, a} a - \mathrm {h} _ {, \mu \nu}.
$$
Since the perturbations are functions of $\mathbf{u} = \mathbf{t} - \mathbf{x}$ , the third term $\square \mathrm{h}_{\mu \nu}$ automatically vanishes and the components $\mathbb{R}_{22}, \mathbb{R}_{23}, \mathbb{R}_{33}$ automatically vanish. For $\mu, \nu = 0,2$ we find
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} ^ {2}}{\mathrm {d u} ^ {2}} \left(\mathrm {h} _ {2} ^ {0} - \mathrm {h} _ {2} ^ {1}\right) = 0.
$$
From this we conclude $\mathbf{h}_2^0 = \mathbf{h}_2^1$ . [The integration constants are of no consequence; they are not wavelike; they carry no energy, and since they make no contribution to the Riemann tensor, they are gauge removable.]
Similarly we have
$$
\mathbf {h} _ {3} ^ {0} = \mathbf {h} _ {3} ^ {1} \quad \text {f r o m} \quad \mu , \nu_ {\cdot} = 0, 3
$$
$$
\mathrm {h} _ {0} ^ {0} - \mathrm {h} _ {0} ^ {1} = \frac {1}{2} \mathrm {h} \quad \text {f r o m} \quad \mu , \nu = 0, 0
$$
$$
\mathrm {h} _ {2} ^ {2} + \mathrm {h} _ {3} ^ {3} = 0 \quad \text {f r o m} \quad \mu , \nu = 1, 0.
$$
Other choices of $\mu \nu$ give no further, independent relations.
These four constraints leave us with six independent components of $\mathbf{h}_{\alpha \beta}$ . A gauge transformation of the form $\xi_{\mu}(t - x)$ leaves the $\mathbf{h}_{\alpha \beta}$ as functions only of $t - x$ and hence does not invalidate our four constraints above. We choose then a gauge transformation of this type which annihilates $\mathbf{h}_{00}, \mathbf{h}_{11}, \mathbf{h}_{02}, \mathbf{h}_{03}$ and which leaves us with only the quantities $\mathbf{h}_{23} = \mathbf{h}_{32}$ and $\mathbf{h}_{22} - \mathbf{h}_{33}$ which are invariant for such a transformation. The explicit form of the gauge transformation is
$$
\begin{array}{l} \xi_ {0} (u) = \frac {1}{2} \int^ {u} h _ {0 0} (\tilde {u}) d \tilde {u} \quad \xi_ {1} (u) = - \frac {1}{2} \int^ {u} h _ {1 1} (\tilde {u}) d \tilde {u} \\ \xi_ {2} (u) = \int^ {u} h _ {0 2} (\tilde {u}) d \tilde {u} \quad \xi_ {3} (u) = \int^ {u} h _ {0 3} (\tilde {u}) d \tilde {u}. \\ \end{array}
$$
Now we consider whether these are the same components as we would get by projecting out the transverse traceless part of the perturbation. Since we have $\mathbf{h} = \mathbf{h}_0^0 + \mathbf{h}_1^1$ projecting out the transverse part is equivalent to projecting out the TT part. But projecting out the transverse part leaves $\mathbf{h}_{22}, \mathbf{h}_{23}, \mathbf{h}_{33}$ invariant, as did our gauge transformation. Thus we get the same components either way.