Problem 16.14. Calculate the surface stresses in a static self-gravitating shell of mass M and circumference $2\pi R$ . What is the proper surface mass density? Compare the stresses to the Newtonian limit when $\mathbf{R} >> \mathbf{M}$ .

## Solution

Solution 16.14. The metric cannot be continuous across the shell in curvature coordinates, because $\mathbf{g}_{\mathrm{rr}} = (1 - 2\mathfrak{m}(\mathbf{r}) / \mathbf{r})^{-1}$ and $\mathfrak{m}(\mathbf{r})$ changes across the shell. Therefore we use isotropic coordinates, in which the metric will be continuous and (matching flat space inside to mass M outside) has the form
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = - \mathrm {e} ^ {\gamma} \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \mathrm {e} ^ {\alpha} \left(\mathrm {d r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {r} ^ {2} \mathrm {d} \Omega^ {2}\right) \tag {1}
$$
$$
e ^ {\gamma} = \left\{ \begin{array}{l l} \left(1 - \frac {M}{2 r}\right) ^ {2} \left(1 + \frac {M}{2 r}\right) ^ {- 2} & r > R \\ \left(1 - \frac {M}{2 R}\right) ^ {2} \left(1 + \frac {M}{2 R}\right) ^ {- 2} & r <   R \end{array} \right. \tag {2a}
$$
$$
e ^ {\alpha} = \left\{ \begin{array}{l l} \left(1 + \frac {M}{2 r}\right) ^ {4} & r > R \\ \left(1 + \frac {M}{2 R}\right) ^ {4} & r <   R. \end{array} \right. \tag {2b}
$$
In Equations (1) and (2) we have used the fact that the geometry is Schwarzschild outside the shell and flat in the interior (Birkhoff's Theorem - see Problem 16.3). Also, the surface of the shell is located at $\mathbf{r} = \mathbf{R}$ (in isotropic radial coordinate distance).
Next we define the integrated stress, $\Lambda_{\hat{\beta}}^{\hat{a}}$ in the following invariant manner
$$
\Lambda^ {\hat {a}} _ {\hat {\beta}} \equiv \underset {\epsilon \rightarrow 0} {\operatorname {L I M}} \int_ {R - \epsilon} ^ {R + \epsilon} T ^ {\hat {a}} _ {\hat {\beta}} d \hat {r} = \underset {\epsilon \rightarrow 0} {\operatorname {L I M}} \int_ {R - \epsilon} ^ {R + \epsilon} T ^ {\hat {a}} _ {\hat {\beta}} e ^ {\frac {1}{2} a} d r. \tag {3}
$$
The components of $\Lambda$ may be evaluated by using the Einstein field equations and by noting that, according to Equations (2) and (3), only terms in $\mathbf{G}_{\nu}^{\mu}$ with second derivatives of the metric potentials can contribute.
The components of $\mathbf{G}_{\nu}^{\mu}$ for the metric of Equation (1) are (see Problem 9.20)
$$
G _ {0} ^ {0} \sim a ^ {\prime \prime} e ^ {- a} \sim - \frac {d}{d r ^ {2}} (e ^ {- a}) \tag {4a}
$$
$$
\mathrm {G} _ {\mathrm {r}} ^ {\mathrm {r}} \sim 0 \tag {4b}
$$
$$
\mathbf {G} _ {\theta} ^ {\theta} = \mathbf {G} _ {\phi} ^ {\phi} \sim \frac {1}{2} \left. \mathrm {e} ^ {- a} (a ^ {\prime \prime} + \gamma^ {\prime \prime}) \right. \sim - \frac {1}{2} \left[ \frac {\mathrm {d} ^ {2}}{\mathrm {d r} ^ {2}} (\mathrm {e} ^ {- a}) - \frac {\mathrm {d}}{\mathrm {d r}} (\mathrm {e} ^ {- a} \gamma^ {\prime}) \right]
$$
where $\sim$ denotes the process of discarding all terms not involving second derivatives. Using Equations (3) and (4), and the Einstein field equations, we get
$$
\Lambda^{\widehat{0}}_{0} = \Lambda^{0}_{0} = -(8\pi)^{-1}\lim_{\epsilon \to 0}\int_{R - \epsilon}^{R + \epsilon}\mathrm{e}^{\alpha /2}\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}}{\mathrm{d}r^{2}} (\mathrm{e}^{-\alpha})\mathrm{d}r\sim -(8\pi)^{-1}\lim_{\epsilon \to 0}\mathrm{e}^{\alpha /2}\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}r} (\mathrm{e}^{-\alpha})\bigg|_{R - \epsilon}^{R + \epsilon}
$$
or
$$
\Lambda_ {\widehat {0}} ^ {\widehat {0}} = \frac {- \mathrm {M}}{4 \pi \mathrm {R} ^ {2} (1 + \mathrm {M} / 2 \mathrm {R}) ^ {3}} \tag {4c}
$$
$$
\Lambda_ {\mathbf {r}} ^ {\hat {\mathbf {r}}} = \Lambda_ {\mathbf {r}} ^ {\mathbf {r}} = 0 \tag {5}
$$
$$
\begin{array}{l} \Lambda^ {\widehat {\theta}} _ {\widehat {\theta}} = \Lambda^ {\widehat {\phi}} _ {\widehat {\phi}} = - (8 \pi) ^ {- 1} \lim  _ {\epsilon \rightarrow 0} \int_ {R - \epsilon} ^ {R + \epsilon} \frac {1}{2} e ^ {\alpha / 2} \left[ \frac {d ^ {2}}{d r ^ {2}} (e ^ {- \alpha}) - \frac {d}{d r} (e ^ {- \alpha} \gamma^ {\prime}) \right] d r \\ = - (8 \pi) ^ {- 1} \underset {\epsilon \rightarrow 0} {\mathrm {L I M}} \frac {1}{2} \mathrm {e} ^ {\alpha / 2} \left[ \frac {\mathrm {d}}{\mathrm {d r}} (\mathrm {e} ^ {- \alpha}) - \mathrm {e} ^ {- \alpha} \gamma^ {\prime} \right] \Big | _ {\substack {\mathrm {R} + \epsilon\\\mathrm {R} - \epsilon}} ^ {\mathrm {R} + \epsilon} \\ \end{array}
$$
or
$$
\Lambda^ {\widehat {\theta}} _ {\widehat {\theta}} = \frac {\mathbb {M}}{8 \pi \mathbb {R} ^ {2}} \left(\frac {\mathbb {M} / 2 \mathbb {R}}{1 - \mathbb {M} / 2 \mathbb {R}}\right) \left(1 + \frac {\mathbb {M}}{2 \mathbb {R}}\right) ^ {- 3}. \tag {6}
$$
To have proper interpretation of Equations (4) to (6) we must remember that $\mathbf{R}$ denotes the radius of the shell in isotropic coordinates. In curvature coordinates, the radius $\mathcal{R}$ is
$$
\mathcal {R} = \mathrm {R} (1 + \mathrm {M} / 2 \mathrm {R}) ^ {2}. \tag {7}
$$
The proper surface mass density is just
$$
\frac {\mathrm {M}}{4 \pi \mathcal {R} ^ {2}} = \frac {\mathrm {M}}{4 \pi \mathrm {R} ^ {2} (1 + \mathrm {M} / 2 \mathrm {R}) ^ {4}}. \tag {8}
$$
The Newtonian limit of Equations (4) to (6) is just
$$
\Lambda_ {\hat {0}} ^ {\hat {0}} \rightarrow - \frac {M}{4 \pi R ^ {2}}
$$
$$
\Lambda_ {\widehat {\mathbf {r}}} ^ {\widehat {\mathbf {r}}} = 0
$$
$$
\Lambda \hat {\theta} _ {\hat {\theta}} = \Lambda \hat {\phi} _ {\hat {\phi}} \rightarrow \frac {\mathrm {M} ^ {2}}{1 6 \pi \mathrm {R} ^ {3}}.
$$