Problem 1.11. Two rings rotate with equal and opposite angular velocity $\omega$ about a common center. Suppose Adam rides on one ring and Eve on the other, and that at some moment they pass each other and their clocks agree. At the moment they pass, Eve sees Adam's clock running more
slowly, so she expects to be ahead the next time they meet. But Adam expects just the reverse. What really happens? Can you reconcile this with Adam's (or Eve's) observations?

## Solution

Solution 1.11. By symmetry, the clocks must read the same the next time Adam and Eve meet. An easy way to see this is by considering proper time intervals in a coordinate system fixed to an inertial observer at rest.
In polar coordinates
$$
- \mathrm {d} r ^ {2} = - \mathrm {d} t ^ {2} + \mathrm {d} r ^ {2} + r ^ {2} \mathrm {d} \phi^ {2} + \mathrm {d} z ^ {2}. \tag {1}
$$
The coordinates of an instantaneously comoving inertial frame attached to Adam are $\phi_{\mathbf{A}} = \omega t$ , with $\mathbf{r}$ and $\mathbf{z}$ constant, and the coordinates of Eve are $\phi_{\mathbf{E}} = -\omega t$ , with $\mathbf{r}$ and $\mathbf{z}$ constant. Thus
$$
\mathrm {d} \tau_ {\mathbf {A}} ^ {2} = \mathrm {d} \tau_ {\mathbf {E}} ^ {2} = \mathrm {d} t ^ {2} \left(1 - r ^ {2} \omega^ {2}\right) \tag {2}
$$
and proper time intervals for Adam and Eve are identical.
A second method is to consider a noninertial coordinate system attached to Adam. He may define surfaces of simultaneity by extending hypersurfaces orthogonal to his world line, the distance between hypersurfaces being at equal intervals of his proper time. At points where his hypersurfaces intersect Eve's world line, her proper time $\tau_{\mathbf{E}}$ is read off and Adam can compute $\tau_{\mathbf{A}}$ as a function of $\tau_{\mathbf{E}}$ . One proceeds by determining the 4-vector $\mathbf{w}$ which connects Adam's and Eve's world lines and which is orthogonal to Adam's 4-velocity:
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathrm {t} = \gamma \tau_ {\mathbf {A}} \\ \mathrm {x} = \sin \omega \mathrm {t} = \sin \omega \gamma \tau_ {\mathbf {A}} \\ \mathrm {y} = \cos \omega \mathrm {t} = \cos \omega \gamma \tau_ {\mathbf {A}} \\ z = 0 \end{array} \tag {3a}
$$
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathrm {t} = \gamma \tau_ {\mathrm {E}} \\ \mathrm {x} = - \sin \omega \mathrm {t} = - \sin \omega \gamma \tau_ {\mathrm {E}} \\ \mathrm {y} = \cos \omega \mathrm {t} = \cos \omega \gamma \tau_ {\mathrm {E}} \\ z = 0 \end{array} \tag {3b}
$$
where we have taken the ring to have unit radius. From these relations
$$
w \equiv x _ {A} - x _ {E} = \left[ \gamma \left(\tau_ {A} - \tau_ {E}\right), \sin \omega \gamma \tau_ {A} + \sin \omega \gamma \tau_ {E}, \cos \omega \gamma \tau_ {A} - \cos \omega \gamma \tau_ {E}, 0 \right]
$$
$$
\mathbf {u} _ {\mathbf {A}} = (\gamma , \omega \gamma \cos \omega \gamma \tau_ {\mathbf {A}}, - \omega \gamma \sin \omega \gamma \tau_ {\mathbf {A}}, 0)
$$
so that requiring $\mathbf{w} \cdot \mathbf{u}_{\mathbf{A}} = 0$ gives
$$
\tau_ {\mathbf {A}} - \tau_ {\mathbf {E}} = \omega \gamma^ {- 1} \sin \left[ \omega \gamma \left(\tau_ {\mathbf {A}} + \tau_ {\mathbf {E}}\right) \right]. \tag {4}
$$
Equation (4) is transcendental for $\tau_{\mathbf{A}}(\tau_{\mathbf{E}})$ . One may easily see, however, that $\tau_{\mathbf{A}} = \tau_{\mathbf{E}}$ when
$$
\sin 2 \omega \gamma \tau_ {\mathbf {A}} = \sin 2 \omega t = 0, \tag {5}
$$
i.e. whenever Adam's and Eve's world lines cross.