Problem 17.11. Prove that there exist "quasi-circular, polar" orbits in the Kerr geometry, i.e. orbits which pass alternately over the north and south poles at a fixed radial coordinate distance. What is the smallest possible polar radius of these orbits?

## Solution

Solution 17.11. Start with the $\mathbf{r}$ and $\theta$ equations for orbital motion in the Kerr geometry (see e.g. MTW, Equation 33.32):
$$
\left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2} \cos \theta\right) \mathrm {d r} / \mathrm {d} \tau = \pm \mathrm {V} _ { \mathrm {r}} ^ { \frac {1}{2}} \tag {1}
$$
$$
\left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2} \cos \theta\right) \mathrm {d} \theta / \mathrm {d} \tau = \pm \mathrm {V} _ { \theta} ^ { \frac {1}{2}} \tag {2}
$$
where
$$
V _ { r } = \left[ E \left(r ^ {2} + a ^ {2}\right) - L a \right] ^ {2} - \Delta \left[ r ^ {2} + (L - a E) ^ {2} + Q \right] \tag {3}
$$
$$
V _ { \theta } = Q - \cos^ {2} \theta [ a ^ {2} (1 - E ^ {2}) + L ^ {2} / \sin^ {2} \theta ] \tag {4}
$$
$$
\Delta \equiv r ^ {2} - 2 M r + a ^ {2}
$$
and where E, L, Q are constants of the motion. To have $\theta$ motion across $\theta = 0$ and $\theta = \pi$ we must have $V_{\theta}$ positive at both $\theta = 0$ and $\theta = \pi$ . By Equation (4) this implies $L = 0$ and $Q > a^2(1 - E^2)$ . Equation (3) then is
$$
V _ { r } = E ^ {2} \left(r ^ {2} + a ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} - \Delta \left[ r ^ {2} + a ^ {2} + I \right] \tag {5}
$$
where
$$
I \equiv Q - a ^ {2} (1 - E ^ {2}) > 0.
$$
The condition that the orbit be at constant coordinate $\mathbf{r}$ is $\mathrm{V_r} = 0$ and $\mathrm{dV_r / dr} = 0$ (condition for a turning point and a perpetual turning point). The condition on the derivative gives
$$
0 = 2 \mathrm {E} ^ {2} \mathrm {r} \left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2}\right) - (\mathrm {r} - \mathrm {M}) \mathrm {E} ^ {2} \left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} / \Delta - \mathrm {r} \Delta \tag {6}
$$
where $\mathbf{V}_{\mathbf{r}} = 0$ and Equation (5) have been used to eliminate the constant I. This result can be rewritten
$$
\mathbf {E} ^ {2} = \mathrm {r} \Delta^ {2} \left[ \left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2}\right) \left(\mathrm {r} ^ {3} - 3 \mathrm {M r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2} \mathrm {r} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2} \mathrm {M}\right) \right] ^ {- 1}. \tag {7}
$$
For very large $r$ we have $E \approx \left(1 - \frac{M}{2r} + \dots\right)$ which is the Newtonian binding energy of a circular orbit. As we decrease $r$ , Equation (7) tells how $E$ changes. Clearly, since the numerator is positive, the only way Equation (7) can fail to provide a solution is for the denominator to go to zero (its going to $\infty$ is obviously impossible outside the horizon). Thus there exist circular polar orbits down to a radius $r$ given by
$$
\mathrm {r} ^ {3} - 3 \mathrm {M r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2} \mathrm {r} + \mathrm {a} ^ {2} \mathrm {M} = 0. \tag {8}
$$
This is easily solved with the cubic formula to give the minimum radius of a polar orbit
$$
\mathbf {r} = \mathbb {M} \left[ \right. 1 + \frac {2 (3 - \tilde {\mathsf {a}} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}}}{3 ^ {\frac {1}{2}}} \cos \left\{ \right.\frac {1}{3} \left. \cos^ {- 1} \left(\frac {3 ^ {\frac {3}{2}} (1 - \tilde {\mathsf {a}} ^ {2})}{(3 - \tilde {\mathsf {a}} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {3}{2}}}\right)\right\}\left. \right]
$$
where $\tilde{\mathbf{a}}\equiv \mathbf{a} / \mathbf{M}$ . Note that $\mathbf{E}^2\rightarrow \infty$ in the limiting case, so the limiting case is a photon orbit. The limiting radius decreases from $\mathbf{r} = 3\mathbf{M}$ for $\mathbf{a} = 0$ to $\mathbf{r} = (1 + 2^{\frac{1}{2}})\mathbf{M}$ for $\mathbf{a} = \mathbf{M}$ .