Problem 16.3. Prove Birkhoff's Theorem: a spherically symmetric vacuum gravitational field is always static, and is always the Schwarzschild solution.

## Solution

Solution 16.3. A spherically symmetric metric can depend only on $t$ , $dt$ , $r$ , $dr$ , and $d\theta^2 + \sin^2\theta d\phi^2$ :
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = - \mathrm {A} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \mathrm {B} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d r} ^ {2} + 2 \mathrm {C} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d r} \mathrm {d t} + \mathrm {D} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \left(\mathrm {d} \theta^ {2} + \sin^ {2} \theta \mathrm {d} \phi^ {2}\right).
$$
Choose a new radial variable $\mathbf{r}' = \mathbf{D}^{\frac{1}{2}}(\mathbf{r}, t)$ . Dropping the prime, we have
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = - \mathrm {E} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \mathrm {F} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d r} ^ {2} + 2 \mathrm {G} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d r} \mathrm {d t} + \mathrm {r} ^ {2} \left(\mathrm {d} \theta^ {2} + \sin^ {2} \theta \mathrm {d} \phi^ {2}\right).
$$
Eliminate G by defining a new time variable
$$
\mathrm {d} t ^ {\prime} = \mathrm {H} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) [ \mathrm {E} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d} t - \mathrm {G} (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t}) \mathrm {d r} ]
$$
where $H$ is an integrating factor chosen to make the right-hand side a perfect differential. The metric then takes the standard form (with the prime dropped)
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = - \mathrm {e} ^ {2 \Phi (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t})} \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \mathrm {e} ^ {2 \lambda (\mathrm {r}, \mathrm {t})} \mathrm {d r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {r} ^ {2} \left(\mathrm {d} \theta^ {2} + \sin^ {2} \theta \mathrm {d} \phi^ {2}\right).
$$
From Problem 9.20, the Einstein tensor has nontrivial components
$$
G _ {\hat {t} \hat {t}} = 2 e ^ {- 2 \lambda} \lambda_ {, r} / r + (1 - e ^ {- 2 \lambda}) / r ^ {2} \tag {1}
$$
$$
\mathbf {G} _ {\hat {\mathrm {t r}}} = 2 \mathrm {e} ^ {- (\Phi + \lambda)} \lambda_ {, t} / \mathrm {r} \tag {2}
$$
$$
\mathrm {G} _ {\mathrm {r r}} ^ {\hat {\lambda}} = \left(\mathrm {e} ^ {- 2 \lambda} - 1\right) / \mathrm {r} ^ {2} + 2 \mathrm {e} ^ {- 2 \lambda} \Phi_ {, \mathrm {r}} / \mathrm {r} \tag {3}
$$
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathbf {G} \hat {\theta} \hat {\theta} = \mathbf {G} _ {\hat {\phi}} \hat {\phi} = e ^ {- 2 \lambda} \left(\Phi_ {, r r} + \Phi_ {, r} ^ {2} - \Phi_ {, r} \lambda , r + \Phi_ {, r} / r - \lambda , r / r\right) \tag {4} \\ - \mathrm {e} ^ {- 2 \Phi} \left(\lambda_ {, \mathrm {t t}} + \lambda_ {, \mathrm {t}} ^ {2} - \Phi_ {, \mathrm {t}} \lambda_ {, \mathrm {t}}\right). \\ \end{array}
$$
When the vacuum field equations $\mathbf{G}_{\hat{\alpha}\hat{\beta}} = 0$ are imposed, Equation (2) shows that $\lambda$ is independent of $t$ and Equation (1) becomes
$$
\frac {2 \mathrm {d} \lambda}{1 - \mathrm {e} ^ {2 \lambda}} = \frac {\mathrm {d r}}{\mathrm {r}}
$$
from which we find
$$
e ^ {2 \lambda} = \left(1 - \frac {2 M}{r}\right) ^ {- 1}. \tag {5}
$$
The constant of integration has been chosen as 2M for convenience. Equations (3) and (4) are now equivalent equations determining $\Phi$ . (They
had to be equivalent because of the identity $\mathbf{G}^{\hat{\beta}}_{\hat{\alpha};\hat{\beta}} = 0$ .) The quickest way to find $\Phi$ is to add Equation (1) to Equation (3). This gives $\Phi_{,r} = -\lambda_{,r}$ so $e^{2\Phi} = f(t)e^{-2\lambda}$ . By defining a new time variable $dt' = f^{\frac{1}{2}}(t)dt$ , $f$ can be eliminated, so the final form of the metric is
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = - \left(1 - \frac {2 \mathrm {M}}{\mathrm {r}}\right) \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \left(1 - \frac {2 \mathrm {M}}{\mathrm {r}}\right) ^ {- 1} \mathrm {d r} ^ {2} + \mathrm {r} ^ {2} (\mathrm {d} \theta^ {2} + \sin^ {2} \theta \mathrm {d} \phi^ {2}).
$$
This is the Schwarzschild metric which is static.
Note: The r coordinate used here is defined by $4\pi \mathbf{r}^2 =$ surface area of spheres defined by the spherical symmetry. If r were not a monotonic function, it could not be used as a coordinate. However, a detailed investigation of this case (MTW, p. 845) shows there are no other solutions.