Problem 19.41. Consider the homogeneous, anisotropic cosmological model with metric
$$
d s ^ {2} = - d t ^ {2} + g _ {i j} (t) d x ^ {i} d x ^ {j}.
$$
where the space slices $t =$ constant have a flat geometry. Find the evolution of the $g_{ij}$ when the universe is "gravitation dominated," i.e. set $T^{\mu \nu}$ to zero in the field equations. Show that the volume of the universe goes to zero linearly with $t$ as $t \to 0$ (in contrast to the $t^{3/2}$ or $t^2$ behavior for radiation- or matter-dominated Friedmann models).

## Solution

Solution 19.41. The quickest way to compute the Ricci tensor for this metric is to use the formulas of Problem 9.33. We have
$$
\mathrm {K} _ {\mathrm {i j}} = - \frac {1}{2} \dot {\mathrm {g}} _ {\mathrm {i j}} \tag {1}
$$
$$
0 = \mathrm {R} _ {\mathrm {t}} ^ {\mathrm {t}} = \mathrm {K} _ {\mathrm {i j}} \mathrm {K} ^ {\mathrm {i j}} - \dot {\mathrm {K}} \tag {2}
$$
$$
0 = \mathrm {R} _ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {t}} = \mathrm {K} _ {\mathrm {j}, \mathrm {i}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} - \mathrm {K}, \mathrm {j} \tag {3}
$$
$$
0 = \mathrm {R} _ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} = \mathrm {K} _ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} \mathrm {K} - \dot {\mathrm {K}} _ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} \tag {4}
$$
where a dot denotes $\mathrm{d} / \mathrm{dt}$ . We have set $^{(3)}\mathbb{R}_{ij}$ to zero in Equation (4) because the 3-geometry is flat, and we have replaced covariant derivatives by partial derivatives in Equation (3).
Contracting Equation (4) gives $\mathbf{K} = \mathbf{K}^2$ and hence
$$
\mathrm {K} = - 1 / \mathrm {t} \tag {5}
$$
with a suitable choice of the constant of integration. Substituting Equation (5) back into Equation (4) gives
$$
\dot {\mathbf {K}} _ {j} ^ {i} = - \mathbf {K} _ {j} ^ {i} / t
$$
and hence
$$
\mathrm {K} _ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} = \mathrm {A} _ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} / \mathrm {t} \tag {6}
$$
where $\mathbf{A}_{\mathbf{j}}^{\mathbf{i}}$ is a constant matrix. We now choose the coordinates so that $\mathbf{K}_{\mathbf{j}}^{\mathbf{i}}$ is diagonal at some time $t = t_0$ . Then by Equation (6) $\mathbf{K}_{\mathbf{j}}^{\mathbf{i}}$ remains diagonal and can be written in the form
$$
\mathrm {K} _ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} = - \delta_ {\mathrm {j}} ^ {\mathrm {i}} \mathrm {P} _ {\mathrm {j}} / \mathrm {t} \tag {7}
$$
where $\mathbf{P_j} =$ constant. For this equation to be consistent with Equation (5) we must have
$$
\sum_ {i} P _ {i} = 1. \tag {8}
$$
Equation (3) is automatically satisfied, Equation (2) implies
$$
\sum_ {i} P _ {i} ^ {2} = 1 \tag {9}
$$
and Equation (1) becomes
$$
\dot {\mathbf {g}} _ {i j} = - 2 \mathbf {g} _ {i m} \mathbf {K} _ {j} ^ {m} = 2 \mathbf {g} _ {i j} \mathbf {P} _ {j} / t
$$
and implies that
$$
\mathbf {g} _ {\mathrm {i j}} = \delta_ {\mathrm {i j}} \mathbf {t} ^ {2 \mathbf {P} _ {\mathrm {i}}}
$$
Thus the final form of the metric ("Kasner metric") is
$$
d s ^ {2} = - d t ^ {2} + t ^ {2 P _ {1}} d x ^ {2} + t ^ {2 P _ {2}} d y ^ {2} + t ^ {2 P _ {3}} d z ^ {2} \tag {10}
$$
subject to the constraints of Equations (8) and (9).
The volume of this universe is proportional to
$$
\left[ ^ {(3)} \mathbf {g} _ {\mathbf {i j}} \right] ^ {\frac {1}{2}} = \left(t ^ {2 \sum \mathbf {P} _ {\mathbf {i}}}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} = t
$$
which can be contrasted with the $t^{\frac{3}{2}}$ behavior of the radiation-dominated Friedmann model.
A convenient way of representing the constraints of Equations (8) and (9) is to draw a circle of radius 2/3 centered at $y = 1/3$ and to inscribe an equilateral triangle. The y-coordinates of the vertices of the triangle will satisfy Equations (8) and (9). From this we see that, except for the special case $(1,0,0)$ which can easily be shown to represent flat space, two of the P's lie between 0 and 1 and one P lies between 0 and -1/3. Thus space must contract along one axis while expanding along the other two.