Problem 19.33. At one time observations seemed to suggest that there was an unusual clustering of quasar redshifts around $z = 2$ . One proposal to explain this is that our universe is a $k = +1$ dust cosmology, with nonzero cosmological constant $\Lambda$ only slightly greater than the value for a static "Einstein Universe" (Problem 19.31). Show that for this model the universe will expand at a decreasing rate to a certain radius $R_{\mathrm{m}}$ , at which radius it will remain for a long time while expanding very slowly, before expanding again at a rate which asymptotically approaches $H = (\Lambda / 3)^{\frac{1}{2}}$ .
Suppose quasar formation occurred at the time of nearly constant radius. What does this model predict for $\rho_{\text{matter}}$ today? [Use $\mathbf{H}_0 = 10^{-28} \, \mathrm{cm}^{-1}$ ].

## Solution

Solution 19.33. Let $\Lambda_{\mathbf{E}}$ be the Einstein value of the cosmological constant so that the Einstein universe has $\rho_0 = \Lambda_{\mathbf{E}} / 4\pi$ , and $\mathbf{R} = \Lambda_{\mathbf{E}}^{-\frac{1}{2}}$ (see Problem 9.31). All dust cosmologies, even with nonzero $\Lambda$ , have $\rho \mathbf{R}^3 =$ constant. Write this as
$$
\rho \mathbf {R} ^ {3} = \frac {1 + \epsilon}{4 \pi \Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}}} \tag {1}
$$
This is equivalent to writing $\Lambda = \Lambda_{\mathbf{E}}(1 + \epsilon)^2$ . The remaining dynamical equation of Problem 19.14 becomes
$$
\dot {\mathbf {R}} ^ {2} = \mathrm {V} (\mathrm {R}) \equiv \frac {\Lambda \mathrm {R} ^ {2}}{3} - 1 + \frac {2 (1 + \epsilon)}{3 \Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}} \mathrm {R}}. \tag {2}
$$
For small $R$ , $\dot{R}^2 \sim 1 / R$ , i.e. $R \sim t^{\frac{2}{3}}$ . The expansion reaches a minimum when $\dot{R}$ is a minimum. Setting $dV / dR$ equal to zero, we find that this occurs when
$$
R = R _ {m} = (1 + \epsilon) ^ {\frac {1}{3}} \Lambda^ {- \frac {1}{2}}. \tag {3}
$$
When $\mathbf{R}$ is close to $\mathbf{R}_{\mathfrak{m}}$
$$
\begin{array}{l} \dot {\mathrm {R}} ^ {2} \approx \mathrm {V} (\mathrm {R} _ {\mathrm {m}}) + \frac {1}{2} (\mathrm {R} - \mathrm {R} _ {\mathrm {m}}) ^ {2} \mathrm {V} ^ {\prime \prime} (\mathrm {R} _ {\mathrm {m}}) + \dots \\ = (1 + \epsilon) ^ {\frac {2}{3}} - 1 + \left[ \Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}} R - (1 + \epsilon) ^ {\frac {1}{3}} \right] ^ {2}. \\ \end{array}
$$
From a table of integrals, we find
$$
R = \frac {(1 + \epsilon) ^ {\frac {1}{3}}}{\Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}}} \left[ 1 + \left\{1 - (1 + \epsilon) ^ {- \frac {2}{3}} \right\} ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \sinh \Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}} \left(t - t _ {m}\right) \right] \tag {4}
$$
where $\mathbf{R} = \mathbf{R}_{\mathbf{m}}$ at $t = t_{\mathbf{m}}$ . For small $\epsilon$ , this becomes
$$
\textsf {R} \approx \mathsf {R} _ {\mathrm {m}} \left[ 1 + \frac {\epsilon}{3} \sinh \Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}} \left(t - t _ {\mathrm {m}}\right) \right].
$$
Thus $\mathbf{R}$ remains approximately equal to $\mathbf{R}_{\mathfrak{m}}$ until
$$
\epsilon \sinh \Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}} \left(t - t _ {\mathrm {m}}\right) \approx 1
$$
i.e. for a time
$$
\left(t - t _ {\mathrm {m}}\right) \approx \Lambda^ {- \frac {1}{2}} \log \left(\frac {1}{\epsilon}\right).
$$
Hence if $\epsilon$ is made sufficiently small, the time can be made arbitrarily long. Eventually $\mathbf{R}$ continues to expand, and asymptotically
$$
\mathbf {H} ^ {2} = \frac {\dot {\mathbf {R}} ^ {2}}{\mathbf {R} ^ {2}} \rightarrow \frac {1}{3} \boldsymbol {\Lambda}
$$
and we get the de Sitter universe of Problem 19.30.
If quasar formation occurred at $z = 2$ , then $R = R_{m}$ at $z = 2$ i.e.
$$
R _ {0} = R _ {m} (1 + z) = 3 R _ {m} = 3 \Lambda^ {- \frac {1}{2}}.
$$
If this is so (with $\epsilon \ll 1$ ), then the density of matter now must be:
$$
\rho_ {0} = (4 \pi \mathrm {R} _ {0} ^ {3} \Lambda^ {\frac {1}{2}}) ^ {- 1} = (1 0 8 \pi) ^ {- 1} \Lambda
$$
$$
\mathbf {H} _ {0} = \left(\dot {\frac {\mathbf {R}}{\mathbf {R}}}\right) _ {0} = \left(\frac {1}{3} \boldsymbol {\Lambda} - \frac {1}{\mathsf {R} _ {0} ^ {2}} + \frac {2}{3 \boldsymbol {\Lambda} ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \mathsf {R} _ {0} ^ {3}}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} = \frac {(2 0 \boldsymbol {\Lambda}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}}}{9}.
$$
Taking $\mathrm{H}_0 = 10^{-28}\mathrm{cm}^{-1}$ gives $\Lambda = 4\times 10^{-56}\mathrm{cm}^{-2}$ , i.e. $\rho_0 = 1.2\times$ $10^{-58}\mathrm{cm}^{-2} = 1.6\times 10^{-30}\mathrm{gm / cm}^3$ .