Problem 12.14. Consider two particles of equal mass in a freely falling elevator. One carries a charge $q$ and the other is neutral. There is a vertical electrical field $E$ in the elevator. Write an equation for the separation of the particles as a function of time, including tidal and electrical effects. Reconcile the existence of both terms with the equivalence principle.

## Solution

Since the particles start from rest, if we confine our observations to short time, $\mathbf{u}^{\mathrm{j}} \approx 0$ , so that
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} ^ {2} \eta^ {z}}{\mathrm {d} t ^ {2}} = - \mathrm {R} _ {0 z 0} ^ {z} \eta^ {z}.
$$
The Riemann component for a weak field is easily calculated
$$
\mathsf {R} _ {0 z 0} ^ {\mathsf {z}} = \frac {\partial^ {2}}{\partial \mathsf {z} ^ {2}} \left(- \frac {\mathsf {M}}{\mathsf {z}}\right) = - \frac {2 \mathsf {M}}{\mathsf {z} ^ {3}}.
$$
Due to the E field, there is an acceleration of the lower particle
$$
\underline {{\underline {{\mathbf {a}}}}} = \frac {\mathbf {q}}{\mathbf {m}} \mathbf {E} \underline {{\underline {{\mathbf {e}}}}} _ {z}.
$$
Thus
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} ^ {2} \eta^ {z}}{\mathrm {d t} ^ {2}} = \frac {2 \mathrm {M}}{z ^ {3}} \eta^ {z} - \frac {\mathrm {q}}{\mathrm {m}} \mathrm {E}.
$$
It may seem disturbing at first that the two terms look as if they can be comparable. But suppose our laboratory is limited to a chunk of spacetime $\Delta \mathbf{x}^{\mu} \approx \mathbf{L}$ . Then at the end of the experiment the gravitational forces will have caused a change in $\eta^{z}$ :
$$
\delta \eta^ {z} \sim \frac {1}{2} \frac {2 \mathbb {M}}{z ^ {3}} \eta^ {z} \mathrm {L} ^ {2}.
$$
But $\eta^z < L$ so
$$
\delta \eta^ {z} = \mathcal {O} (\mathrm {L} ^ {3}).
$$
The change in $\eta^z$ due to the electric field is
$$
\delta \eta^ {z} \sim - \frac {\mathrm {q}}{\mathrm {m}} \cdot \mathrm {E} \cdot \frac {1}{2} \mathrm {L} ^ {2} = \mathcal {O} (\mathrm {L} ^ {2})
$$
so, if we sufficiently limit the “‘size’” of our experiment we can ignore gravitational effects.