Problem 1.17. An observer experiences a uniform acceleration in the $x$ direction, of magnitude $g$ . Define a coordinate system $(\overline{t}, \overline{x}, \overline{y}, \overline{z})$ for him in the following way: (i) Let the observer be at $\overline{x} = \overline{y} = \overline{z} = 0$ and let $\overline{t}$ be his proper time. (ii) Let his hyperplanes of simultaneity agree with the hyperplanes of simultaneity of an instantaneously comoving inertial frame. (iii) Let the other "coordinate stationary observers" (for whom $\overline{x}, \overline{y}, \overline{z}$ are constant) move in such a way that they are always at rest with respect to the observer on the hyperplanes of simultaneity. At $t = 0$ label all spatial points with the same labels as the momentarily comoving inertial system $t = 0, x, y, z$ .
Give the coordinate transformation between $t, x, y, z$ and $\overline{t}, \overline{x}, \overline{y}, \overline{z}$ . Show that coordinate stationary clocks cannot remain synchronized.

## Solution

Solution 1.17. If the acceleration is in the $x$ direction we can clearly choose $y = \overline{y}$ , $z = \overline{z}$ . Note that the world lines
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathbf {t} = \mathbf {A} \sinh \mathbf {g} \overline {{\mathbf {t}}} + \mathbf {B} \\ \mathbf {x} = \mathbf {A} \cosh \mathbf {g t} + \mathbf {C} \\ \end{array}
$$
represent world lines with constant acceleration. [Easily verified. See also Problem 2.13.] If $\mathbf{A}, \mathbf{B}, \mathbf{C}$ are functions only of $\overline{\mathbf{x}}$ then the above equations represent a 4-velocity
$$
\textbf {u} = \cosh \mathrm {g} \overline {{\mathbf {t}}} \textbf {e} _ {\mathbf {t}} + \sinh \mathrm {g} \overline {{\mathbf {t}}} \textbf {e} _ {\mathbf {x}},
$$
independent of $\overline{\mathbf{x}}$ , and they therefore give us a set of world lines which are parallel on a $\overline{\mathbf{t}} =$ constant surface. If, furthermore B and C are constant, u is perpendicular to the hyperplane $\mathrm{d}\overline{\mathbf{t}} = 0$ (i.e. the hyperplanes $\overline{\mathbf{t}} =$ constant are hyperplanes of simultaneity for the momentarily comoving inertial frame). It remains only to choose A(x), B, and C correctly:
$$
\begin{array}{l} t = (g ^ {- 1} + \bar {x}) \sinh g \bar {t} \\ \mathbf {x} = \left(\mathbf {g} ^ {- 1} + \overline {{\mathbf {x}}}\right) \cosh \mathbf {g} \overline {{\mathbf {t}}} - \mathbf {g} ^ {- 1}. \\ \end{array}
$$
Notice that the element of proper time for a coordinate stationary observer is
$$
\mathrm {d} r = \left(\mathrm {d t} ^ {2} - \mathrm {d x} ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} = (1 + \mathrm {g} \overline {{\mathrm {x}}}) \mathrm {d} \overline {{\mathrm {t}}}
$$
Since it does not depend only on $t$ , clocks will not remain synchronized. i.e. They can only agree on one hyperplane.