10.15. In a stationary metric with time Killing vector $\xi$ the "energy at infinity" $\mathbf{E} = -\mathbf{p} \cdot \boldsymbol{\xi}$ of a test particle with 4-momentum $\mathbf{p}$ is conserved. Find the minimum value of $\mathbf{E} / \mu$ (where $\mu =$ particle mass) that the particle can have at a given point in the spacetime, in terms of the norm of $\boldsymbol{\xi}$ .

## Solution

Solution 10.15. Consider a particle of rest mass $\mu$ and conserved energy $\mathbf{E} = -\mathbf{p} \cdot \boldsymbol{\xi}$ where $\mathbf{p}$ is the 4-momentum and $\boldsymbol{\xi}$ is the time Killing vector. Not all values of $\mathbf{E} / \mu$ are possible for trajectories through a given point in spacetime. For example, particles at radial infinity must have $\mathbf{E} / \mu \geq 1$ . To find the bound on $\mathbf{E} / \mu$ for a general point, pick an orthonormal frame at the point. The 4-velocity of a particle has components $\mathbf{u} = (\gamma, \gamma \mathbf{v})$
with $\underline{\mathbf{v}}$ a 3-vector and $\gamma = (1 - \mathbf{v}^2)^{-\frac{1}{2}}$ ; the time Killing vector has components $\xi = (\xi_0, \xi)$ , with $\underline{\xi}$ a 3-vector. The particle's ratio of energy to rest mass is given by
$$
\mathbf {E} / \mu = - \mathbf {u} \cdot \boldsymbol {\xi} _ {(t)} = \gamma (\xi_ {0} - \underline {{v}} \cdot \underline {{\xi}}) \tag {1}
$$
where the dot denotes the scalar product in the local Euclidean 3-space. Evidently, a necessary (but not a sufficient) condition for an extremum (hence a bound) on $\mathbf{E} / \mu$ is
$$
\underline {{\mathbf {v}}} \cdot \underline {{\xi}} = \pm \mathbf {v} \xi . \tag {2}
$$
Here $\mathbf{v} \equiv |\underline{\mathbf{v}}|$ , $\xi \equiv |\underline{\xi}|$ . Now we distinguish two cases: If $\xi$ is spacelike (e.g. in the ergosphere of a Kerr blackhole), then we have $\xi_0 < \xi$ ; and inspection of Equation (1) shows that all values of $\mathrm{E} / \mu$ are possible, that is $-\infty < \mathrm{E} / \mu < +\infty$ . This is the answer for regions in which $\xi$ is spacelike. The infinite limits correspond to $\mathbf{v} \rightarrow \mathbf{1}$ with the two signs of Equation (2). If, instead, $\xi$ is timelike (e.g. at radial infinity), so that $\xi_0 > \xi$ , then the right-hand side of Equation (1) is always positive, and there is a nontrivial lower bound on $\mathrm{E} / \mu$ . Writing Equation (1) and using Equation (2) with the upper sign, we obtain
$$
(\xi^ {2} + \mathrm {E} ^ {2} / \mu^ {2}) \mathrm {v} ^ {2} - 2 \xi \xi_ {0} \mathrm {v} + (\xi_ {0} ^ {2} - \mathrm {E} ^ {2} / \mu^ {2}) = 0.
$$
The extremum in $\mathbf{E} / \mu$ is obtained by setting the discriminant of this equation, a quadratic in $\mathbf{v}$ , equal to zero; this gives
$$
0 = (\mathrm {E} / \mu) ^ {2} \left[ (\mathrm {E} / \mu) ^ {2} - \xi^ {2} + \xi_ {0} ^ {2} \right].
$$
The root $\mathbf{E} / \mu = 0$ is spurious, and the lower bound on $\mathbf{E} / \mu$ is
$$
(\mathrm {E} / \mu) ^ {2} = \dot {\xi} _ {0} ^ {2} - \dot {\xi} ^ {2} = - \boldsymbol {\xi} \cdot \boldsymbol {\xi}.
$$
We see that the allowed range of $\mathbf{E} / \mu$ at a point depends only on the norm of the time Killing vector at that point:
$$
(- \boldsymbol {\xi} \cdot \boldsymbol {\xi}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \leq \mathbf {E} / \mu <   + \infty
$$
for $\pmb{\xi}$ timelike.