Problem 18.17. Roughly how many thermal gravitons does a 100 watt lightbulb emit in its rated lifetime of 1000 hours? What is the approximate wavelength and number of gravitons emitted when the lightbulb is dropped and broken on a cement floor?

## Solution

Solution 18.17. The mass motions relevant to gravitational wave generation are the collisions of electrons with lattice points, photon scattering, etc. Since the thermal velocities of the electrons greatly exceed their drift velocity, the energy involved in a collision is of order kT. According to the analysis of Problem 18.16, the gravitational wave power generated by one electron should be $(\mathrm{kT} / \tau)^2$ where $\tau$ is the mean time between collisions of the electron with the lattice. The total energy, in gravitational waves, emitted during the bulb lifetime must then be
$$
\mathrm {E} _ {\mathrm {G W}} \sim \mathrm {N} \left(\frac {\mathrm {k T}}{\tau}\right) ^ {2} \mathrm {T} _ {\mathrm {L}} / (1 0 ^ {5 9} \mathrm {e r g s} / \mathrm {s e c .})
$$
$\mathbf{N} =$ number of conduction electrons in filament
$$
\mathrm {T} _ {\mathrm {L}} = \text {b u l b l i f e t i m e} \sim 4 \times 1 0 ^ {6} \text {s e c o n d s}.
$$
The typical graviton generated should have a frequency of roughly $r^{-1}$ so that $n$ , the number of gravitons is of order
$$
n \sim \frac {E _ {G W} ^ {\tau}}{\bar {n}} \sim \frac {N}{r \bar {n}} \frac {(k T) ^ {2} T _ {L}}{1 0 ^ {5 9} \text {e r g s / s e c .}}.
$$
For the light bulb kT must be on the order of an electron volt, since the thermal emission is primarily in the visible, and rough values of N and $\tau$ are $10^{17}$ electrons and $10^{-13}$ seconds. For these values the number of gravitons emitted during the bulb's lifetime is of order $10^{-19}$ .
To estimate the number of gravitons given out by the lightbulb when it is dropped, we assume that the energy of the falling light bulb is converted to kinetic energy of shattering; and we calculate the resulting production of gravitational waves according to the formula in Problem 18.16. If the light bulb weighs 20 grams and is dropped from a height of 1 meter, it gains $\sim 10^6$ ergs. Let us assume that the shattering is characterized by a time of .1 sec, so that the total power in shattering is $10^7$ ergs/sec. If $10\%$ of this is relevant to quadrupole oscillations, then
$$
\mathrm {P} _ {\mathrm {G W}} \sim \frac {(1 0 ^ {6} \mathrm {e r g s / s e c}) ^ {2}}{1 0 ^ {5 9} \mathrm {e r g s / s e c}} \approx 1 0 ^ {- 4 7} \mathrm {e r g s / s e c}
$$
$$
E _ {G W} \sim P _ {G W} \times . 1 \sec \approx 1 0 ^ {- 4 8} \text {e r g s}.
$$
The number of $\pi \omega \sim \pi / .1$ sec $\sim 10^{-26}$ erg gravitons is then on the order of $10^{-22}$ .