Problem 1.9. Suppose that an observer at rest with respect to the fixed distant stars sees an isotropic distribution of stars. That is, in any solid angle $\mathrm{d}\Omega$ he sees $\mathrm{dN} = \mathrm{N}(\mathrm{d}\Omega /4\pi)$ stars, where $\mathbf{N}$ is the total number of stars he can see.
Suppose now that another observer (whose rest frame is $S'$ ) is moving at a relativistic velocity $\beta$ in the $e_x$ direction. What is the distribution of stars seen by this observer? Specifically, what is the distribution function $P(\theta', \phi')$ such that the number of stars seen by this observer in his solid angle $d\Omega'$ is $P(\theta', \phi') d\Omega'$ ? Check to see that $\int_{\text{sphere}} P(\theta', \phi') d\Omega' = N$ , and check that $P(\theta', \phi') \to \frac{N}{4\pi}$ as $\beta \to 0$ . Where will the observer see the stars "bunch up"?

## Solution

Solution 1.9. If $\overline{\theta}$ is the direction of the motion of a photon from star to observer then the star is observed at angle $\theta = \pi - \overline{\theta}$ . The transformation of photon directions was derived in the previous problem. From that result we have here
$$
\cos \theta = \frac {\cos \theta^ {\prime} - \beta}{1 - \beta \cos \theta^ {\prime}}.
$$
The number of stars observed in solid angle $\mathrm{d}\Omega$ is then
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathrm {d} \mathbf {N} = \mathrm {N d} \Omega / 4 \pi = (\mathrm {N} / 4 \pi) 2 \pi \mathrm {d} (\cos \theta) \\ = \frac {1}{2} N \frac {d (\cos \theta)}{d (\cos \theta^ {\prime})} d (\cos \theta^ {\prime}) \\ = \frac {1}{2} N \frac {\left(1 - \beta^ {2}\right)}{\left(1 - \beta \cos \theta^ {\prime}\right) ^ {2}} d (\cos \theta^ {\prime}). \\ \end{array}
$$
Since $\mathrm{d}\mathbf{N} = 2\pi \mathbf{P}(\theta', \phi') \mathrm{d}(\cos \theta')$ the distribution in $S'$ is
$$
\mathrm {P} (\theta^ {\prime}, \phi^ {\prime}) = \frac {\mathrm {N}}{4 \pi} \frac {(1 - \beta^ {2})}{(1 - \beta \cos \theta^ {\prime}) ^ {2}} .
$$
Checks: $\beta \rightarrow 0\mathrm{P}(\theta^{\prime},\phi^{\prime})\rightarrow \mathbf{N} / 4\pi = \mathrm{P}(\theta ,\phi)$
$$
\int_ {\text {s p h e r e}} \mathrm {P} \left(\theta^ {\prime}, \phi^ {\prime}\right) \mathrm {d} \Omega = \frac {\mathrm {N} \left(1 - \beta^ {2}\right)}{4 \pi} \int_ {- 1} ^ {+ 1} \frac {2 \pi \mathrm {d} \cos \theta^ {\prime}}{\left(1 - \beta \cos \theta^ {\prime}\right) ^ {2}} = \mathrm {N}.
$$
You can easily verify that half the stars are contained between $\theta' = 0$ and $\theta_{\frac{1}{2}}' = \cos^{-1}\beta < \pi/2$ . Thus the stars "bunch up" in the forward direction. For $\beta \approx 1$ , $\theta_{\frac{1}{2}}' \approx [2(1 - \beta)]^{\frac{1}{2}}$ and the bunching is pronounced.