Problem 1.28. What is the least number of pure boosts which generate an arbitrary Lorentz transformation? Note: This is a difficult problem!

## Solution

Solution 1.28. From Solution 1.25, any homogeneous proper Lorentz transformation corresponds to a $2 \times 2$ complex unimodular matrix $L$ , or a complex 3-vector $\underline{\mathbf{P}}$ , say. We will write the $2 \times 2$ matrix as
$$
\mathbf {L} (\underline {{\mathbf {P}}}) = \left(\mathbf {1} + \mathbf {P} ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \mathbf {I} + \underline {{\mathbf {P}}} \cdot \underline {{\boldsymbol {\sigma}}} ,
$$
where $\mathbf{P}^2 = \underline{\mathbf{P}}\cdot \underline{\mathbf{P}}$ and I is the identity matrix which we will often not write in explicitly. (In Solution 1.25, we used $\underline{\mathbf{P}} = \underline{\mathbf{q}} (\sinh \mathbf{q}) / \mathbf{q}$ .) For a pure boost with velocity v and direction n, P is real: $\underline{\mathbf{P}} = \underline{\mathbf{n}}\sinh (\psi /2)$ , where $\psi = \tanh v$ is the rapidity. For a pure rotation of magnitude $\theta$ about an axis n, P is imaginary: $\underline{\mathbf{P}} = \underline{\mathbf{i}}\underline{\mathbf{n}}\sin (\theta /2)$ and $\mathbf{P}^2\geq -1$ .
The composition of two Lorentz transformations represented by $\mathbf{P}$
and $\mathbb{Q}$ is
$$
\underline {{{\bf P}}} \circ \underline {{{\bf Q}}} = (1 + {\bf P} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{{\bf Q}}} + (1 + {\bf Q} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{{\bf P}}} + i \underline {{{\bf P}}} \times \underline {{{\bf Q}}} .
$$
This follows from multiplying the matrices corresponding to the Lorentz transformations:
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathrm {L} (\underset {\sim} {\mathrm {P}}) \mathrm {L} (\underset {\sim} {\mathrm {Q}}) = \left[ \left(1 + \mathrm {P} ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} + \underset {\sim} {\mathrm {P}} \cdot \underline {{\sigma}} \right] \left[ \left(1 + \mathrm {Q} ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} + \underset {\sim} {\mathrm {Q}} \cdot \underline {{\sigma}} \right] \\ = (1 + P ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} (1 + Q ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} + \left[ (1 + P ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} Q + (1 + Q ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} P \right] \cdot \underline {{\sigma}} + \underline {{P}} \cdot Q + i \underline {{P}} \times Q \cdot \underline {{\sigma}}. \\ \end{array}
$$
The idea of the solution is first to find a characterization of the product of two pure boosts (Lemma 1), then to find a criterion for the case that an arbitrary Lorentz transformation is the product of three boosts (Lemma 2), and finally to show that this criterion is always satisfied except for the case of a “ $180^{\circ}$ screw”, which requires four boosts.
LEMMA 1. $\underline{\mathbb{P}}$ is the product of two pure boosts $\underline{\mathbb{C}}$ and $\underline{\mathbb{D}}$ if and only if $\mathbf{P}^2$ is real and positive.
Proof. If $\underline{\mathbf{P}}$ is the product of $\underline{\mathbf{C}}$ and $\underline{\mathbf{D}}$ (real, non-null vectors), then
$$
\begin{array}{l} \underline {{\mathbf {P}}} = \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} ^ {\circ} \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} = (1 + \mathbf {C} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} + (1 + \mathbf {D} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} + i \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} \times \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} \quad . (1) \\ \mathbf {P} ^ {2} = (1 + \mathbf {C} ^ {2}) \mathbf {D} ^ {2} + (1 + \mathbf {D} ^ {2}) \mathbf {C} ^ {2} + 2 (1 + \mathbf {C} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} (1 + \mathbf {D} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} - \mathbf {C} ^ {2} \mathbf {D} ^ {2} + (\underline {{\mathbf {C}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}}) ^ {2} \\ = \left[ \left(1 + C ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \left(1 + D ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} + \underline {{C}} \cdot \underline {{D}} \right] ^ {2} - 1 (2) \\ > \left[ \left(1 + 2 C D + C ^ {2} D ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} + C \cdot D \right] ^ {2} - 1 \quad \text {s i n c e} C ^ {2} + D ^ {2} > 2 C D \\ \geq \left(1 + | \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} | + \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}}\right) ^ {2} - 1 \quad \text {s i n c e} \quad \mathbf {C D} \geq | \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} | \\ \geq 0. \\ \end{array}
$$
Conversely, if $\mathbf{P}^2$ is real and positive, then one can write $\underline{\mathbf{P}} = \underline{\mathbf{A}} + \mathbf{i}\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ , where $\underline{\mathbf{A}} \cdot \underline{\mathbf{B}} = 0$ and $\mathbf{A}^2 - \mathbf{B}^2 > 0$ . To construct boosts $\underline{\mathbf{C}}$ and $\underline{\mathbf{D}}$ , choose a vector $\underline{\mathbf{E}}$ orthogonal to both $\underline{\mathbf{A}}$ and $\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ with $\mathbf{E}^2$ to be determined. As an ansatz, take
$$
\underline {{\mathbf {C}}} = \underline {{\mathbf {a} \underline {{\mathbf {A}}} + \underline {{\mathbf {E}}}}}, \quad \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} = \underline {{\mathbf {a} \underline {{\mathbf {A}}} - \underline {{\mathbf {E}}}}}, \tag {3}
$$
where $a$ is a normalization constant to be determined. From Equation (3) $C^2 = D^2 = a^2 A^2 + E^2$ and by Equation (1)
$$
\underline {{\underline {{\mathbf {A}}}}} = (1 + \mathrm {C} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{\underline {{\mathbf {D}}}}} + (1 + \mathrm {D} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{\underline {{\mathbf {C}}}}} = (1 + a ^ {2} \mathrm {A} ^ {2} + \mathrm {E} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} 2 a \underline {{\underline {{\mathbf {A}}}}}
$$
and
$$
\underline {{\mathbf {B}}} = \underline {{\mathbf {C}}} \times \underline {{\mathbf {D}}} = 2 \mathrm {a} \underline {{\mathbf {E}}} \times \underline {{\mathbf {A}}}.
$$
Thus the construction will succeed as long as
$$
1 = 2 a \left(1 + a ^ {2} A ^ {2} + E ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}}, \tag {4a}
$$
$$
\mathbf {B} ^ {2} = 4 \mathrm {a} ^ {2} \mathbf {E} ^ {2} \mathbf {A} ^ {2}. \tag {4b}
$$
Square Equation (4a) and solve for $a^2$ :
$$
a ^ {2} = \left\{\left[ (1 + E ^ {2}) ^ {2} + A ^ {2} \right] ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - (1 + E ^ {2}) \right\} / \left(2 A ^ {2}\right). \tag {5a}
$$
Equation (4b) now implies
$$
\mathbf {B} ^ {2} = 2 \mathbf {E} ^ {2} \left\{\left[ \left(\mathbf {1} + \mathbf {E} ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} + \mathbf {A} ^ {2} \right] ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - \left(\mathbf {1} + \mathbf {E} ^ {2}\right) \right\}.
$$
After squaring and simplifying, this reduces to
$$
4 \left(\mathbf {A} ^ {2} - \mathbf {B} ^ {2}\right) \mathbf {E} ^ {4} - 4 \mathbf {B} ^ {2} \mathbf {E} ^ {2} - \mathbf {B} ^ {4} = 0, \tag {5b}
$$
which always has a positive solution for $\mathbf{E}^2$ since $\mathbf{A}^2 >\mathbf{B}^2$ . The parameter $a$ is given by (5a) and the proof is now complete.
Now try to express any $\underline{\mathbf{Q}}$ as a product of three boosts. By Lemma 1, this is possible if and only if there exists a boost $\underline{\mathbf{C}}$ such that $\mathbf{P}^2$ is real and positive, where $\underline{\mathbf{P}} \equiv \underline{\mathbf{Q}} \circ (-\underline{\mathbf{C}})$ . By algebra similar to that used to reach Equation (2), we find
$$
\left(1 + \mathrm {P} ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} = \left(1 + \mathrm {Q} ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \left(1 + \mathrm {C} ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - \underset {\sim} {\mathrm {Q}} \cdot \underset {\sim} {\mathrm {C}}. \tag {6}
$$
So we must find $\underline{\mathbf{C}}$ such that $(1 + \mathbf{P}^2)^{\frac{1}{2}}$ evaluated from Equation (6) is real ( $\underline{\mathbf{Q}}$ is in general complex) and $(1 + \mathbf{P}^2)^{\frac{1}{2}} > 1$ .
Let $\underline{\mathbf{Q}} = \underline{\mathbf{A}} +\mathbf{i}\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ (A and B real), and let the boost D be some linear combination of A and B.
LEMMA 2. There exists a boost $\underline{\mathbf{C}}$ satisfying the required properties if and only if there exists a boost $\underline{\mathbf{D}}$ which is a linear combination of $\underline{\mathbf{A}}$
and B such that
$$
\mathrm {d} \equiv (1 + Q ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} (1 + D ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - \underline {{\underline {{Q}}}} \cdot \underline {{\underline {{D}}}} \tag {7}
$$
with real and strictly positive.
Proof. Let $\underline{\mathbf{F}}$ be a vector orthogonal to both $\underline{\mathbf{A}}$ and $\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ with $\mathbf{F}^2 < 1$ to be determined shortly. Define
$$
\underline {{\underline {{\mathsf {C}}}}} = (\underline {{\mathsf {D}}} + \underline {{\mathsf {F}}}) / (1 - \mathsf {F} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}}
$$
so that $1 + \mathbf{C}^2 = (1 + \mathbf{D}^2) / (1 - \mathbf{F}^2)$ . From Equation (6),
$$
(1 + \mathbf {P} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} = [ (1 + \mathbf {Q} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} (1 + \mathbf {D} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - \underline {{{\mathbf {Q}}}} \cdot \underline {{{\mathbf {D}}}} ] (1 - \mathbf {F} ^ {2}) ^ {- \frac {1}{2}} = \mathsf {d} (1 - \mathbf {F} ^ {2}) ^ {- \frac {1}{2}} .
$$
Thus if and only if $d$ is real and positive, we can choose $F^2$ close enough to 1 that $(1 + P^2)^{\frac{1}{2}}$ is real and has magnitude greater than 1. Lemma 2 is proven.
Now consider two cases:
Case 1: A not parallel to B, $A^2 \neq 0$ , and $B^2 \neq 0$ .
In this case Equation (7) gives
$$
\left(\mathrm {d} + \underbrace {\mathrm {Q} \cdot \underline {{\mathrm {D}}}}\right) ^ {2} = \left(1 + \mathrm {Q} ^ {2}\right) \left(1 + \mathrm {D} ^ {2}\right).
$$
Substituting $\underline{\mathbf{Q}} = \underline{\mathbf{A}} +\mathbf{i}\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ gives two real equations:
$$
\left. \left(\mathrm {d} + \underline {{\mathbf {A}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}}\right) ^ {2} - \left(\underline {{\mathbf {B}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}}\right) ^ {2} = \left(1 + \mathrm {A} ^ {2} - \mathrm {B} ^ {2}\right) \left(1 + \mathrm {D} ^ {2}\right), \right. \tag {8a}
$$
$$
\left(\mathrm {d} + \underline {{\mathrm {A}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathrm {D}}}\right) \underline {{\mathrm {B}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathrm {D}}} = \underline {{\mathrm {A}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathrm {B}}} \left(1 + \mathrm {D} ^ {2}\right). \tag {8b}
$$
Solve Equations (8) simultaneously for $\mathbf{d} + \mathbf{A} \cdot \mathbf{D}$ and $\mathbf{B} \cdot \mathbf{D}$ to get:
$$
\left. \left(\mathrm {d} + \underline {{\mathbf {A}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {D}}}\right) ^ {2} = \frac {1}{2} \left(1 + \mathrm {D} ^ {2}\right) \left\{\left[ \left(1 + \mathrm {A} ^ {2} - \mathrm {B} ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} + 4 (\underline {{\mathbf {A}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {B}}}) ^ {2} \right] ^ {\frac {1}{2}} + \left(1 + \mathrm {A} ^ {2} - \mathrm {B} ^ {2}\right) \right\}, \right. \tag {9a}
$$
$$
\left. (\underline {{\mathrm {B}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathrm {D}}}) ^ {2} = \frac {1}{2} (1 + \mathrm {D} ^ {2}) \left\{\left[ \left(1 + \mathrm {A} ^ {2} - \mathrm {B} ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} + 4 (\underline {{\mathrm {A}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathrm {B}}}) ^ {2} \right] ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - \left(1 + \mathrm {A} ^ {2} - \mathrm {B} ^ {2}\right) \right\}. \right. \tag {9b}
$$
These equations do not determine $\underline{\mathbf{D}}$ and/or d explicitly, because $\mathbf{D}^2$ occurs on the right-hand side. One possible solution of these equations is to take $\underline{\mathbf{D}} = \mathbf{b}\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ , b to be determined. For this choice Equation (9b) becomes
$$
(2 b ^ {2} B ^ {4}) / (1 + b ^ {2} B ^ {2}) = \left[ \left(1 + A ^ {2} - B ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} + 4 (\underset {\sim} {A} \cdot \underset {\sim} {B}) ^ {2} \right] ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - (1 + A ^ {2} - B ^ {2}). \tag {10}
$$
To show that there is always a real solution $\mathbf{b}$ of Equation (10), note that the right-hand side is $\geq 0$ (obvious) and also $< 2\mathbf{B}^2$ ; this follows since
$$
\begin{array}{l} 4 (\underline {{\mathbf {A}}} \cdot \underline {{\mathbf {B}}}) ^ {2} <   4 \mathbf {A} ^ {2} \mathbf {B} ^ {2} \\ = \left(1 + A ^ {2} + B ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} - \left(1 + A ^ {2} - B ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} - 4 B ^ {2} \\ <   \left(\mathbf {1} + \mathbf {A} ^ {2} + \mathbf {B} ^ {2}\right) ^ {2} - \left(\mathbf {1} + \mathbf {A} ^ {2} - \mathbf {B} ^ {2}\right) ^ {2}. \\ \end{array}
$$
Because the left-hand side of Equation (10) varies from 0 to $2\mathbf{B}^2$ as $\sf b^2$ varies from 0 to $\infty$ , there is always a real constant $\sf b$ such that Equation (10) holds. Thus Equation (9b) is satisfied by our ansatz, and then Equation (9a) (with $\underline{\sf D} = \underline{\sf b}\underline{\sf B}$ and with the sign of $\sf b$ chosen appropriately) defines a positive value of $\sf d$ . Thus $\underline{\sf Q}$ is the product of 3 boosts.
$$
\text {C a s e 2 :} \underset {\sim} {\mathbf {A}} \text {p a r a l l e l t o} \underset {\sim} {\mathbf {B}} (\text {i n c l u d i n g} \mathbf {A} ^ {2} = 0 \text {o r} \mathbf {B} ^ {2} = 0).
$$
Now Equation (7) becomes a scalar equation since all the vectors are collinear:
$$
d = \left(1 + Q ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \left(1 + D ^ {2}\right) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} - Q D. \tag {11}
$$
Let
$$
\psi = \sinh^ {- 1} Q = a + i \beta ,
$$
and make $\psi$ single-valued by the restriction $-\pi /2 < \beta \leq \pi /2$ . Also let
$$
\phi = \sinh^ {- 1} D \quad (\text {r e a l}).
$$
Equation (11) then becomes
$$
d = \cosh (\psi - \phi) = \cosh (a - \phi) \cos \beta - i \sinh (a - \phi) \sin \beta .
$$
If $\beta = 0$ , we are done ( $\underline{\mathbf{Q}}$ is a pure boost). If $\beta \neq 0$ , for $d$ to be real, we must choose $\phi = a$ (this fixes $D$ ); i.e. $d = \cos \beta$ . If $\beta \neq \pi/2$ , $d$ is positive and $\underline{\mathbf{Q}}$ is the product of three boosts. If $\beta = \pi/2$ , $d = 0$ and $\underline{\mathbf{Q}}$ is not the product of three boosts.
The case $\beta = \pi / 2$ corresponds to $Q = \sinh (\alpha + \mathrm{i}\pi / 2) = \mathrm{i}\cosh \alpha$ . So $Q$ is pure imaginary and $Q^2 \leq -1$ . This corresponds to a rotation through $180^\circ$ composed with a boost of rapidity $2a$ , a “ $180^\circ$ screw.” (In particular, a pure rotation through $180^\circ$ cannot be attained by three boosts.)
A $180^{\circ}$ screw can be achieved by four boosts; for, if $\underline{\mathbf{C}}$ is a boost and $\underline{\mathbf{Q}} = \mathbf{i}\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ with $\mathbf{B}^2\geq 1$ , then
$$
\underline {{{\mathsf {R}}}} \equiv \underline {{{\mathsf {Q}}}} ^ {\circ} \underline {{{\mathsf {C}}}} = \textbf {i} (\mathsf {B} ^ {2} - 1) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{{\mathsf {C}}}} + \textbf {i} (1 + \mathsf {C} ^ {2}) ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \underline {{{\mathsf {B}}}} - \underline {{{\mathsf {B}}}} \times \underline {{{\mathsf {C}}}}
$$
is not a $180^{\circ}$ screw provided $\underline{\mathbf{C}}$ is not parallel to $\underline{\mathbf{B}}$ . Therefore $\underline{\mathbf{R}}$ is the product of three boosts and so $\underline{\mathbf{Q}} = \underline{\mathbf{R}} \circ (-\underline{\mathbf{C}})$ is the product of four boosts.
This solution is due to D. M. Eardley.