Problem 17.14. According to Hawking's theorem (that in a collision of two black holes the total surface area must not decrease), what is the minimum mass $\mathbf{M}_2$ of a Schwarzschild black hole that results from the collision of two Kerr black holes of equal mass $\mathbf{M}_1$ and opposite angular
momentum parameter, a? Suppose $|a| \approx M_1$ ; what fraction of the original mass can be radiated away? Are there any other uncharged black-hole collisions that can get this much energy out?

## Solution

Solution 17.14. The two initial black holes have the same area, so the total initial surface area $(Q = 0$ in Problem 17.13) is
$$
\mathbf {A} _ { \mathbf {i} } = 1 6 \pi \mathbf {M} _ { \mathbf {1} } \left[ \mathbf {M} _ { \mathbf {1} } + \left(\mathbf {M} _ { \mathbf {1} } ^ {2} - a ^ {2}\right) ^ { \frac {1}{2} } \right].
$$
The final black hole is a Schwarzschild black hole, so
$$
\mathbf {A _ {f}} = 4 \pi (2 \mathbf {M} _ {2}) ^ {2} = 1 6 \pi \mathbf {M} _ {2} ^ {2}.
$$
The inequality $\mathbf{A}_{\mathbf{f}} \geq \mathbf{A}_{\mathbf{i}}$ becomes
$$
\mathbf {M} _ {2} ^ {2} \geq \mathbf {M} _ {1} ^ {2} + \mathbf {M} _ {1} (\mathbf {M} _ {1} ^ {2} - \mathbf {a} ^ {2}) ^ { \frac {1}{2} }.
$$
If $a = M_1$ , this means $M_2 \geq M_1$ . The total initial mass was $2M_1$ , so the final mass must be at least half of this. According to Hawking's theorem then, up to $50\%$ of the original mass can be radiated away!
This is the most efficient of the collisions without charge. Suppose two black holes of masses $\mathbf{M}_1$ and $\mathbf{M}_2$ , and angular momentum parameters $\mathbf{a}_1$ and $\mathbf{a}_2$ coalesce to form a black hole of mass $\mathbf{M}_3$ , and parameter $\mathbf{a}_3$ ; then $\mathbf{A}_{\mathrm{f}} \geq \mathbf{A}_{\mathrm{i}}$ implies that
$$
\mathsf {M} _ { 1 } \left[ \mathsf {M} _ { 1 } + (\mathsf {M} _ { 1 } ^ {2} - \mathsf {a} _ { 1 } ^ {2}) ^ { \frac {1}{2} } \right] + \mathsf {M} _ { 2 } \left[ \mathsf {M} _ { 2 } + (\mathsf {M} _ { 2 } ^ {2} - \mathsf {a} _ { 2 } ^ {2}) ^ { \frac {1}{2} } \right] \leq \mathsf {M} _ { 3 } \left[ \mathsf {M} _ { 3 } + (\mathsf {M} _ { 3 } ^ {2} - \mathsf {a} _ { 3 } ^ {2}) ^ { \frac {1}{2} } \right].
$$
One gets the most energy out when the equality obtains. Moreover, for given $\mathbb{M}_1$ , $\mathbb{M}_2$ , $\mathbf{a}_1$ , $\mathbf{a}_2$ the smallest $\mathbb{M}_3$ (hence the largest radiation of energy) will occur for $\mathbf{a}_3 = 0$ . Similarly, for given $\mathbb{M}_3$ (with $\mathbf{a}_3 = 0$ ), the largest $\mathbb{M}_1 + \mathbb{M}_2$ (hence the largest radiation of energy) will occur for $|\mathbf{a}_1| = |\mathbf{a}_2| = \mathbb{M}_1 = \mathbb{M}_2$ . Since $\mathbf{a}_3 = 0$ , conservation of angular momentum implies that $\mathbf{a}_1 = -\mathbf{a}_2$ . This is just the situation we worked in detail above. The conclusion, therefore, is that when two Kerr holes collide and coalesce, no more than $50\%$ of their original mass can be radiated away!