Problem 17.21. Consider the vacuum metric
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = - \frac {\left(1 - \frac {1}{2} \mathrm {m} / \rho\right) ^ {2}}{\left(1 + \frac {1}{2} \mathrm {m} / \rho\right) ^ {2}} \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \frac {\left(1 - \frac {1}{2} \mathrm {m} / \rho\right) ^ {2}}{\left(1 - \frac {3}{2} \mathrm {m} / \rho\right) ^ {2}} (\mathrm {d} \rho^ {2} + \rho^ {2} \mathrm {d} \theta^ {2} + \rho^ {2} \sin^ {2} \theta \mathrm {d} \phi^ {2})
$$
(which is a particular solution to the static, spherically symmetric problem in the Lightman-Lee theory of gravity). Does the above metric describe a black hole; and, if so, how do the hole's properties differ from those of the corresponding hole in general relativity?

## Solution

Solution 17.21. For all static spacetimes, the “surface of infinite red-shift” $(\mathbf{g}_{00} = 0)$ coincides with the horizon (Problem 17.12). Therefore,
if the above metric describes a black hole, its surface is at $\mathbf{g}_{00} = 0$ or $\overline{\rho} = \frac{1}{2}$ , where $\overline{\rho} \equiv \rho / m$ . We will now show that, in fact, the surface $\overline{\rho} = \frac{1}{2}$ is not contained in the same manifold as the one which becomes asymptotically flat $(\overline{\rho} \to \infty)$ and thus cannot be reached by objects in our universe.
A glance at the $\mathbf{g}_{\rho \rho}$ portion of the metric shows that $\overline{\rho} = 1.5$ is an infinite proper radial distance away from any $\overline{\rho} > 1.5$ . To see that $\overline{\rho} = 1.5$ is also infinite proper time away and thus removed from the manifold it is sufficient to consider radial null geodesics. (The reader can verify that for nonradial or timelike geodesics, matters get even worse):
$$
\mathbf {g} _ {\rho \rho} (\mathfrak {p} ^ {\rho}) ^ {2} + \mathbf {g} ^ {0 0} (\mathfrak {p} _ {0}) ^ {2} = 0
$$
or
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \rho}{\mathrm {d} \lambda} = \left(\overline {{\rho}} - \frac {3}{2}\right) \frac {\left(\overline {{\rho}} + \frac {1}{2}\right)}{\left(\overline {{\rho}} - \frac {1}{2}\right) ^ {2}} p _ {0}
$$
where $\lambda$ is an affine parameter. Remembering that $\mathfrak{p}_0$ is a constant of the motion (stationary metric), the above equations show that
$$
p _ {0} ^ {- 1} \int_ {\bar {\rho}} ^ {\bar {\rho} = \frac {3}{2}} \frac {(\bar {\rho} - \frac {1}{2}) ^ {2} d \rho}{(\bar {\rho} - \frac {3}{2}) (\bar {\rho} + \frac {1}{2})} = \int_ {\lambda} ^ {\lambda_ {0}} d \lambda ,
$$
Since the integral on the left diverges at $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ , the $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ surface is an infinite affine distance away. There are no singularities for $\overline{\rho} \geq \frac{3}{2}$ and $\overline{\rho}$ is a monotonically decreasing coordinate for radially infalling photons and particles, so $\overline{\rho} = \frac{1}{2}$ , as well as $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ , must be off the physical manifold.
The above conclusions also indicate that the surface of a star collapsing to form the given vacuum metric can never reach $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ ; thus for realistic physical systems, the given metric is realizable only for $\overline{\rho} > \frac{3}{2}$ .
$$
p _ {0} ^ {- 1} \int_ {\bar {\rho}} ^ {\bar {\rho} = \frac {3}{2}} \frac {(\bar {\rho} - \frac {1}{2}) ^ {2} d \rho}{(\bar {\rho} - \frac {3}{2}) (\bar {\rho} + \frac {1}{2})} = \int_ {\lambda} ^ {\lambda_ {0}} d \lambda ,
$$
Since the integral on the left diverges at $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ , the $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ surface is an infinite affine distance away. There are no singularities for $\overline{\rho} \geq \frac{3}{2}$ and $\overline{\rho}$ is a monotonically decreasing coordinate for radially infalling photons and particles, so $\overline{\rho} = \frac{1}{2}$ , as well as $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ , must be off the physical manifold.
The above conclusions also indicate that the surface of a star collapsing to form the given vacuum metric can never reach $\overline{\rho} = \frac{3}{2}$ ; thus for realistic physical systems, the given metric is realizable only for $\overline{\rho} > \frac{3}{2}$ .