Problem 14.6. Two identical containers in a static uniform gravitational field contain different substances. The containers and contents have identical time-independent densities of mass-energy, but different (and possibly anisotropic) stresses. Do the containers weigh the same if weighed on the same scale?

## Solution

Solution 14.6. A static uniform gravitational field has a line element
$$
\mathrm {d s} ^ {2} = \mathrm {g} _ {\mathrm {t t}} \mathrm {d t} ^ {2} + \mathrm {g} _ {\mathrm {z z}} \mathrm {d z} ^ {2} + \mathrm {d x} ^ {2} + \mathrm {d y} ^ {2} \tag {1}
$$
where $\mathbf{g}_{tt}$ and $\mathbf{g}_{zz}$ depend only on $z$ . The nonzero Christoffel symbols are easily computed (Problem 7.6). The weight as measured by a scale at $z = 0$ is $\mathbf{W}(0)$ , where
$$
W (z) = \int T ^ {\widehat {z} \widehat {z}} d x d y = \int g _ {z z} T ^ {z z} d x d y. \tag {2}
$$
We wish to show that $W(0)$ depends only on $T^{\widehat{tt}} = g_{tt}T^{tt}$ and on no other $T^{\widehat{a}\widehat{\beta}}$ . We have
$$
0 = \mathrm {T} ^ {\alpha \beta}; \beta = | \mathrm {g} | ^ {- \frac {1}{2}} \left(| \mathrm {g} | ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \mathrm {T} ^ {\alpha \beta}\right), \beta + \Gamma^ {\alpha} _ {\beta \gamma} \mathrm {T} ^ {\beta \gamma}. \tag {3}
$$
Take $\alpha = t$ and integrate over $x, y$ , using the fact that $g_{\alpha \beta}$ is independent of $x, y$ and $t$ :
$$
\begin{array}{l} 0 = \int T ^ {t t} _ {, t} d x d y + \int T ^ {t x} _ {, x} d x d y + \int T ^ {t y} _ {, y} d x d y + | g | ^ {- \frac {1}{2}} (| g | ^ {\frac {1}{2}} \int T ^ {t z} d x d y) _ {, z} \\ + 2 \Gamma^ {t} _ {t z} \int T ^ {t z} d x d y. \tag {4} \\ \end{array}
$$
The $1^{\text{st}}$ term vanishes because $\mathbf{T}^{\text{tt}}$ is time-independent. The $2^{\text{nd}}$ and $3^{\text{rd}}$ terms give terms proportional to $\mathbf{T}^{\text{tx}}$ and $\mathbf{T}^{\text{ty}}$ on the boundary of the integration region. These vanish for a boundary outside the container.
Equation (4) can be put in the form
$$
0 = | \mathrm {g} | ^ {- \frac {1}{2}} \mathrm {g} _ { \mathrm {t t}} ^ { - 1} \left(| \mathrm {g} | ^ { \frac {1}{2}} \mathrm {g} _ { \mathrm {t t}} \int \mathrm {T} ^ { \mathrm {t z}} \mathrm {d x} \mathrm {d y}\right) _ {, z}. \tag {5}
$$
Thus $|g|^{\frac{1}{2}} g_{tt} \int T^{tz} \, dx \, dy$ is independent of $z$ . Since this term vanishes above the top of the container, it vanishes everywhere.
Now put $a = z$ in Equation (3) and integrate over $x$ and $y$ :
$$
\begin{array}{l} 0 = \int T ^ {z t}, _ {t} d x d y + \int T ^ {z x}, _ {x} d x d y + \int T ^ {z y}, _ {y} d x d y + | g | ^ { - \frac {1}{2}} (| g | ^ { \frac {1}{2}} \int T ^ {z z} d x d y), _ {z} \\ + \Gamma^ {z} _ {t t} \int \mathrm {T} ^ {t t} d x d y + \Gamma^ {z} _ {z z} \int \mathrm {T} ^ {z z} d x d y. \tag {6} \\ \end{array}
$$
The $1^{\text{st}}$ term vanishes as above, while the $2^{\text{nd}}$ and $3^{\text{rd}}$ give boundary contributions which vanish. Using Equation (2), we find
$$
\left(\left| \mathbf {g } _ { \mathrm {t t}} \right| ^ { \frac {1}{2}} \mathrm {W}\right) _ {, z} = \left| \mathbf {g } _ { \mathrm {t t}} \right| ^ { \frac {1}{2}} _ {, z} \int \mathrm {T} ^ { \widehat { \mathrm {t t}}} \mathrm {d x} \mathrm {d y}. \tag {7}
$$
Integrate Equation (7) from $z = 0$ to the top of the container, and use the fact that $W(top) = 0$ to get
$$
W (0) = \left| g _ {t t} \right| _ {z = 0} ^ { - \frac {1}{2}} \int_ {0} ^ { \text {t o p}} d z \int d x d y \left| g _ {t t} \right| ^ { \frac {1}{2}}, z T ^ { \hat {t} \hat {t}}, \tag {8}
$$
which depends only on the component $\mathbf{T}^{\widehat{\mathbf{t}}\mathbf{t}}$ . (Solution due to W. Unruh.)