Problem 18.15. A weak, plane gravitational wave of frequency $\omega$ and dimensionless amplitude $h$ passes through a "hard-sphere" gas of temperature $T$ . The mean free path of atoms in the gas is $\ell$ , and the gas is dilute enough so that $\ell >> c / \omega$ . Show that in a finite amount of time the particles in the gas will be heated to relativistic temperatures. Estimate this time. Estimate the distance over which the wave is damped by a factor of $e$ in amplitude.

## Solution

Solution 18.15. Consider two particles a distance $d$ apart. Their relative velocity fluctuates under the influence of the wave by an amount $\Delta v \approx h\omega d$ . If the two particles collide during this cycle of the wave, their distance must have been of order $d \sim v / \omega$ , so $\Delta v \sim hv$ . On the average then, particles collide with energies fractionally larger by $(\Delta v / v)^2$ than they would in the absence of the wave. Since the collision randomizes their direction of motion, this energy is not subtracted out half a cycle later when the wave is reversed. Another effect also adds of order $(\Delta v / v)^2$ fractional energy per collision: the fact that particles moving toward each other at $v + \Delta v$ have a greater chance of colliding than do particles with $v - \Delta v$ . We conclude that at temperature $T$ every collision is, on the average, increased in energy by order $(\Delta v / v)^2 kT \sim h^2 kT$ . The number of collisions per volume per time is $n_0 v / \ell \sim (n_0 / \ell) (kT / m)^{\frac{1}{2}}$ , where $n_0$ is the number density and $m$ the mass of the particles. Thus the internal energy absorbed per volume per time is approximately
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathrm {E} _ {\text {i n t}}}{\mathrm {d} t} \sim \frac {\mathrm {h} ^ {2}}{\mathrm {n} _ {0} ^ {1 / 2} \mathrm {m} ^ {1 / 2} \ell} \left(\mathrm {n} _ {0} \mathrm {k T}\right) ^ {3/2} \sim \frac {\mathrm {h} ^ {2}}{\mathrm {n} _ {0} ^ {1 / 2} \mathrm {m} ^ {1 / 2} \ell} \mathrm {E} _ {\text {i n t}} ^ {3/2}. \tag {1}
$$
This is integrated to give
$$
E _ {i n t} ^ {1 / 2} (t) \sim \frac {t _ {0} E _ {i n t} ^ {1 / 2} (t = 0)}{t _ {0} - t} \tag {2}
$$
where $t_0 \sim (\ell / h^2)(m / kT)^{\frac{1}{2}}$ . Thus, $E_{\mathrm{int}} \to \infty$ in a finite time $t_0$ ; of course this does not happen: our Newtonian treatment breaks down at a time $t' \sim t_0$ when the gas becomes relativistic.
The "front" of the wave loses energy at the rate given by Equation (1). Since its internal energy density is of order $\omega^2\mathrm{h}^2\mathrm{c}^2/\mathrm{G}$ , it is damped in a distance
$$
\begin{array}{l} \ell_ {\text {d a m p i n g}} \sim c \tau_ {\text {d a m p i n g}} \sim \frac {\omega ^ {2} h ^ {2} c ^ {3} / G}{h ^ {2} \left(n _ {0} k T\right) ^ {3/2} / \left(n _ {0} ^ {1 / 2} m ^ {1 / 2} \ell\right)} \\ \sim \ell \left(\frac {c}{v _ {t h e r m a l}}\right) ^ {3} \left(\frac {\omega^ {2}}{G m n _ {0}}\right). \\ \end{array}
$$
(The first term in parenthesis approaches unity for a relativistic gas; the second approaches unity for a wave at the “gravitational plasma frequency” of the gas.)