Problem 17.12. A Killing horizon is a null hypersurface generated by a Killing vector. An ergosurface ("stationary limit") is an infinite red-shift surface for static observers. Show that for a static black hole the ergosurface is a Killing horizon.

## Solution

Solution 17.12. Let $\pmb{\xi}$ be the timelike Killing vector present because the black hole is static. Then Killing's equation tells us
$$
\xi_ {\alpha ; \beta} = - \xi_ {\beta ; \alpha} \tag {1}
$$
and the requirement for a static geometry (see Problem 10.8) is
$$
\xi_ {[ \alpha ; \beta} \xi_ {\gamma ]} = 0. \tag {2}
$$
A static observer has 4-velocity parallel to $\pmb{\xi}$ , i.e.
$$
\mathbf {u} = \boldsymbol {\xi} / \mathbf {v} ^ { \frac {1}{2}} \tag {3}
$$
$$
v = - \xi^ {a} \xi_ {a}. \tag {4}
$$
For a photon of momentum $\mathbf{p}$ , the infinite red-shift surface occurs when
$$
0 = (\mathbf {p} \cdot \mathbf {u}) _ { \infty } / (\mathbf {p} \cdot \mathbf {u}) _ { \text {e m i t t e r} } = v _ { \text {e m i t t e r }} ^ { \frac {1}{2} }
$$
where we have used the fact that $\mathbf{p} \cdot \boldsymbol{\xi}$ is constant along the geodesic trajectory of the photon and $\mathbf{v}$ is normalized to unity at infinity. Thus, the ergosurface is the surface at which $\boldsymbol{\xi}$ becomes null. We now prove that the ergosurface, $\mathbf{v} = 0$ , is a null hypersurface, i.e. that its normal vector is null: We use Equation (1) to write Equation (2) in the form
$$
\xi_ {\alpha ; \beta} \xi_ {\gamma} + \xi_ {\gamma ; \alpha} \xi_ {\beta} - \xi_ {\gamma ; \beta} \xi_ {\alpha} = 0, \tag {5}
$$
then we dot $\xi^{\gamma}$ into Equation (5):
$$
v \xi_ {\alpha ; \beta} + v, [ \alpha \xi_ {\beta} ] = 0. \tag {6}
$$
Equation (6) shows that $\mathbf{v}_{,a}$ is parallel to $\xi_{a}$ wherever $\mathbf{v} = 0$ . But $\mathbf{v}_{,a}$ is the normal to $\mathbf{v} = 0$ , i.e. the normal is a null vector.
The proof has to be modified in the degenerate case when $\mathbf{v}_{,a} = 0$ , since it is possible that $\mathbf{v} = 0$ in a finite region, not just on a hypersurface. However, a detailed investigation [B. Carter, J. Math. Phys. 10, 70, (1969)] shows that this is not so.
The theorem proven here corresponds to a Schwarzschild black hole, where $\mathbf{r} = 2\mathbf{M}$ is both the horizon and infinite red-shift surface for static observers (in fact, for all observers). A Kerr black hole is an example of the case where the ergosurface does not coincide with the horizon.