Problem 21.12. Find an instantaneous spatial metric which represents $N$ point masses at arbitrary positions at an instant of time symmetry.

## Solution

Solution 21.12. To find an instantaneous metric, we need only to consider the metric and field equations on a spacelike Cauchy surface $S$ , the surface of time symmetry. Six of the ten Einstein field equations determine the metric off $S$ ; these we do not need to worry about. The remaining four equations are initial-value equations and can be written in the form (see Equations (6) and (7) of Problem 9.33)
$$
\frac {1}{2} ^ {(3)} \mathrm {R} - \frac {1}{2} \left(\mathrm {K} _ { \mathrm {i}} ^ { \mathrm {i}}\right) ^ {2} + \frac {1}{2} \mathrm {K} _ { \ell} ^ { \mathrm {m}} \mathrm {K} _ { \mathrm {m}} ^ { \ell} = 0 \tag {1a}
$$
$$
\mathrm {K} _ { \mathrm {i}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} | _ { \mathrm {m}} - \mathrm {K} _ { \mathrm {m}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} | _ { \mathrm {i}} = 0, \tag {1b}
$$
where ${}^{(3)}\mathbf{R}$ is the curvature scalar on $\mathbf{S}$ , $\mathbf{K}_{\mathfrak{m}}^{\mathbf{i}}$ is the extrinsic curvature, a slash represents covariant differentiation with respect to the three geometry ${}^{(3)}\mathbf{g}_{ij}$ on $\mathbf{S}$ , and where we have used the vacuum initial value equations.
At a moment of time symmetry the (timelike) normal to S, from which $\mathbf{K}_{ij}$ is computed, goes into minus itself under time reversal. Thus $\mathbf{K}_{ij} = -\mathbf{K}_{ij}$ and hence the extrinsic curvature of S must vanish. For $\mathbf{K}_{ij} = 0$ on S, Equation (1b) is trivially satisfied and Equation (1a) takes the form
$$
\left(^ {3}\right) \mathrm {R} = 0. \tag {2}
$$
As a solution to Equation (2), we begin with the ansatz
$$
\mathrm {g} _ { \mathrm {i j}} = \Phi^ {4} \eta_ { \mathrm {i j}} \tag {3}
$$
and see if there is a $\Phi$ which satisfies Equation (2):
$$
\left. ^ {(3)} \mathbf {R} = \mathbf {g} ^ { \mathrm {i j}} \left(\Gamma_ { \mathrm {i m}, \mathrm {j}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} - \Gamma_ { \mathrm {i j}, \mathrm {m}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} + \Gamma_ { \mathrm {l i}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} \Gamma_ { \mathrm {j m}} ^ { \ell} - \Gamma_ { \mathrm {m l}} ^ { \ell} \Gamma_ { \mathrm {i j}} ^ { \mathrm {m}}\right). \right. \tag {4}
$$
With the ansatz of Equation (3) we have, for the Christoffel symbols
$$
\Gamma^ { \mathrm {m}} _ { \ell_ { \mathrm {i}}} = 2 \Phi^ {- 1} \left(\Phi_ {, \mathrm {i}} \delta^ { \mathrm {m}} _ { \mathrm {i}} + \Phi_ {, \ell} \delta^ { \mathrm {m}} _ { \mathrm {i}} - \Phi ^ { \mathrm {, m}} \eta_ { \ell_ { \mathrm {i}}}\right), \tag {5a}
$$
$$
\mathrm {g} ^ { \mathrm {i j}} \Gamma_ { \mathrm {i m}, \mathrm {j}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} = - 6 \Phi^ {- 6} (\nabla \Phi) ^ {2} + 6 \Phi^ {- 5} \nabla^ {2} \Phi \tag {5b}
$$
$$
\mathrm {g} ^ { \mathrm {i j}} \Gamma_ { \mathrm {i j}, \mathrm {m}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} = 2 \Phi^ {- 6} (\nabla \Phi) ^ {2} - 2 \Phi^ {- 5} \nabla^ {2} \Phi \tag {5c}
$$
$$
\mathrm {g} ^ { \mathrm {i j}} \Gamma_ { \ell \mathrm {i}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} \Gamma_ { \mathrm {j m}} ^ { \ell} = - 4 \Phi^ {- 6} (\nabla \Phi) ^ {2} \tag {5d}
$$
$$
\mathrm {g} ^ { \mathrm {i j}} \Gamma_ { \mathrm {m} \ell} ^ { \ell} \Gamma_ { \mathrm {i j}} ^ { \mathrm {m}} = - 1 2 \Phi^ {- 6} (\nabla \Phi) ^ {2} \tag {5e}
$$
where we have used the symbols
$$
(\nabla \Phi) ^ {2} \equiv \Phi_ {, i} \Phi_ {, j} \eta^ {i j} \tag {5f}
$$
$$
\nabla^ {2} \Phi \equiv \Phi_ {, i, j} \eta^ {i j}. \tag {5g}
$$
Combining Equations (4)-(5), we see that Equation (2) reduces to
$$
\left(^ {(3)} \mathbf {R} = 0 = 8 \Phi^ {- 5} \nabla^ {2} \Phi , \right. \tag {6}
$$
which is satisfied by any solution of Laplace's equation. One such solution is
$$
\Phi = 1 + \sum_ {i} \frac {M _ {i}}{2 r _ {i}} \tag {7}
$$
leading to a metric
$$
\mathbf {g} _ { \mathbf {i j}} = \left(1 + \sum_ { \mathbf {i}} \frac { \mathbf {M} _ { \mathbf {i}}}{2 \mathbf {r} _ { \mathbf {i}}}\right) ^ {4} \eta_ { \mathbf {i j}}. \tag {8}
$$
The lowest order term in $\mathbf{M} / \mathbf{r}$ for the metric in Equation (8) is
$$
\mathbf {g} _ { \mathbf {i j}} \approx \left(1 + \sum_ { \mathbf {i}} \frac {2 \mathrm {M} _ { \mathbf {i}}}{\mathrm {r} _ { \mathbf {i}}}\right) \boldsymbol {\eta} _ { \mathbf {i j}}
$$
which is the “Post-Newtonian” approximation to the spatial part of a metric generated by point masses $\mathbf{M}_{\mathrm{i}}$ located at positions $\mathbf{r}_{\mathrm{i}}$ . Thus the metric in Equation (8) is, in fact, the instantaneous spatial metric for point masses at arbitrary positions at a moment of time symmetry.