Problem 3.24. Show that four vectors $\mathbf{u}, \mathbf{v}, \mathbf{w}, \mathbf{x}$ , are linearly independent if and only if $\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w} \wedge \mathbf{x} \neq 0$ . Show that in this case $\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w} \wedge \mathbf{x}$ is proportional to the totally antisymmetric tensor $\varepsilon$ . (The “wedge” product is defined as the antisymmetrized direct product, e.g. $\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} = \mathbf{u} \otimes \mathbf{v} - \mathbf{v} \otimes \mathbf{u}$ .)

## Solution

Solution 3.24. Suppose $\alpha \mathbf{u} + \beta \mathbf{v} + \gamma \mathbf{w} + \delta \mathbf{x} = 0$ for $\alpha, \beta, \gamma, \delta$ not all zero. If $\alpha \neq 0$ , take the wedge product of this equation with $\mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w} \wedge \mathbf{x}$ and get $\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w} \wedge \mathbf{x} = 0$ . If $\alpha = 0$ , then form analogous product using the $\beta, \gamma, \delta$ term. Conversely, if $\mathbf{u}, \mathbf{w}, \mathbf{x}$ and $\mathbf{v}$ are linearly independent, then any vector can be written as a linear combination of them; in particular, any 4 orthonormal basis vectors can be so written. Thus
$$
\begin{array}{l} 0 \neq e _ { 0 } \wedge e _ { 1 } \wedge e _ { 2 } \wedge e _ { 3 } = \left(a _ { 1 } \mathbf {u} + \beta_ { 1 } \mathbf {v} + \gamma_ { 1 } \mathbf {w} + \delta_ { 1 } \mathbf {x}\right) \wedge \left(a _ { 2 } \mathbf {u} + \dots\right) \\ \wedge \left(\alpha_ { 3 } \mathbf {u} + \dots\right) \wedge \left(\alpha_ { 4 } \mathbf {u} + \dots\right) \propto \left(\mathbf {u} \wedge \mathbf {v} \wedge \mathbf {w} \wedge \mathbf {x}\right), \\ \end{array}
$$
since cross terms with a duplicated vector vanish. Hence $\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w} \wedge \mathbf{x} \neq 0$ . Since $\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w} \wedge \mathbf{x}$ is totally antisymmetric on all “slots” and is a multiple of $\mathbf{e}_0 \wedge \mathbf{e}_1 \wedge \mathbf{e}_2 \wedge \mathbf{e}_3$ , it must uniquely be proportional to the $\varepsilon$ tensor. See Problems 3.20, 3.21.