Problem 3.20. Prove that, except for scaling by a constant, there is a unique tensor $\varepsilon_{\alpha \beta \gamma \delta}$ which is totally antisymmetric on all its 4 indices. The usual choice is to take $\varepsilon_{0123} = 1$ in Minkowski coordinates. What are the components of $\varepsilon$ in a general coordinate frame, with metric $g_{\mu \nu}$ ?

## Solution

Solution 3.20. If $\varepsilon_{\alpha \beta \gamma \delta}$ is totally antisymmetric, then given any one component e.g. $\varepsilon_{0123}$ any other component (with nonrepeated indices) can be found by permuting the indices on that given component. Components with repeated indices, of course, vanish. The tensor is thus fixed once $\varepsilon_{0123}$ is given, i.e. the tensor is unique up to scaling by a constant. With the usual, position independent choice of normalization, we have
$$
\varepsilon_ {0 1 2 3} = - \varepsilon_ {1 0 2 3} = \varepsilon_ {1 0 3 2} = \dots = 1
$$
in Minkowski coordinates. If we now transform to other coordinates $\mathbf{x}^{\mu^{\prime}}(\mathbf{x}^{\alpha})$ we get
$$
\varepsilon_ {\mu^ { \nu \lambda^ { \prime} \sigma^ { \prime} } } = \frac {\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {a}}{\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {\mu^ { \prime} }} \frac {\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {\beta}}{\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {\nu^ { \prime} }} \frac {\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {\gamma}}{\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {\lambda^ { \prime} }} \frac {\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {\delta}}{\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {\sigma^ { \prime} }} \varepsilon_ {a} \beta \gamma \delta = \det \left[ \frac {\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {a}}{\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {a ^ { \prime} }} \right] \varepsilon_ {\mu \nu \lambda \sigma}.
$$
Now
$$
\mathrm {g} _ {\mu^ { \prime} \nu^ { \prime} } = \frac {\partial_ { \mathbf {x} ^ { \alpha} }}{\partial_ { \mathbf {x} ^ { \mu^ { \prime} } }} \frac {\partial_ { \mathbf {x} ^ { \beta} }}{\partial_ { \mathbf {x} ^ { \nu^ { \prime} } }} \eta_ { \alpha } \beta
$$
$$
\det  \left(\mathrm {g} _ {\mu^ { \prime} \nu^ { \prime} }\right) = \left| \det  \left(\frac {\partial \mathrm {x} ^ { \alpha} }{\partial \mathrm {x} ^ { \alpha^ { \prime} }}\right) \right| ^ {2} \det  (\eta_ { \alpha \beta })
$$
so that
$$
\det  \left(\partial \mathbf {x} ^ {a} / \partial \mathbf {x} ^ {a ^ { \prime} }\right) = \left[ - \det  \left(\mathbf {g} _ {\mu^ { \prime} \nu^ { \prime} }\right) \right] ^ { \frac {1}{2} }
$$
and finally
$$
\varepsilon_ { \mu \acute {\nu} ^ { \prime } \lambda^ { \prime } \sigma^ { \prime } } = \left[ - \det \left(\mathbf {g} _ {u ^ { \prime } \nu}\right) \right] ^ { \frac {1}{2} } \varepsilon_ { \mu \nu \lambda \sigma }.
$$