Problem 5.12. Consider a spherical particle of mass $m$ which scatters all electromagnetic radiation incident on it, isotropically in its rest frame. Let $A$ be the effective cross sectional area of the particle. Find the equation of motion of the particle in a constant radiation field of intensity $S$ (energy per time per area), and solve it for the case of a particle initially at rest. (Poynting-Robertson effect).

## Solution

Solution 5.12. Let the 4-velocity of the particle be $\mathbf{u}$ . Let the null 4-vector along which the radiation propagates be $\ell$ . The particle absorbs a 4-momentum flux $-\mathrm{SA}(\mathbf{u} \cdot \boldsymbol{\ell})\ell$ , i.e. the stress-energy of the radiation
$\mathbf{T} = \mathbf{S}\boldsymbol{\ell} \otimes \boldsymbol{\ell}$ multiplied by the effective area of the particle and dotted into its 4-velocity (to get the flux in its frame). The minus sign is due to the $-+++$ signature. The time component of this in its rest frame is $\mathrm{SA}(\mathbf{u} \cdot \boldsymbol{\ell})(\mathbf{u} \cdot \boldsymbol{\ell})$ ; this is the absorbed energy which the particle reradiates in its own rest frame, so the net change in 4-momentum is
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {p}}{\mathrm {d} \tau} = \frac {\mathrm {m d} \mathbf {u}}{\mathrm {d} \tau} = - \operatorname {S A} [ (\mathbf {u} \cdot \ell) \ell + (\mathbf {u} \cdot \ell) ^ {2} \mathbf {u} ]. \tag {1}
$$
This is the equation of motion for $\mathbf{u}$ .
To solve, let $\mathbf{W} \equiv \mathbf{u} \cdot \boldsymbol{\ell}$ , and dot the equation of motion with $\boldsymbol{\ell}$ to get
$$
\mathrm {d} \mathbf {W} / \mathrm {d} \tau = - (\mathbf {S A} / \mathfrak {m}) \mathbf {W} ^ {3}
$$
and hence
$$
W = - \left[ (2 S A \tau / m) + K \right] ^ { - \frac {1}{2}} \tag {2}
$$
where $\mathbf{K}$ is some constant. We now treat $\mathbf{W}$ as the independent variable and substitute $\mathrm{d}\tau = -\mathrm{dWm} / \mathrm{SAW}^3$ in Equation (1) to get
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {u}}{\mathrm {d} W} - \frac { \mathbf {u }}{W} = \frac {1}{W ^ {2}} \ell . \tag {3}
$$
This has the integrating factor 1/W and can easily be integrated:
$$
\frac {\mathrm {d}}{\mathrm {d} \mathrm {W}} \left(\frac {1}{\mathrm {W}} \mathrm {u}\right) = \frac {1}{\mathrm {W} ^ {3}} \ell \tag {4}
$$
$$
u = - \frac {1}{2 W} \ell + W q \tag {5}
$$
where $\mathbf{q}$ is a constant of integration. The conditions $\mathbf{u} \cdot \boldsymbol{\ell} = \mathbf{W}$ and $\mathbf{u} \cdot \mathbf{u} = -1$ imply that $\mathbf{q} \cdot \boldsymbol{\ell} = 1$ and $\mathbf{q} \cdot \mathbf{q} = 0$ . Substitute for W from Equation (2) and integrate Equation (5) to find
$$
\mathbf {x} = + \frac {1}{6 a} (2 a \tau + K) ^ {\frac {3}{2}} \ell - \frac {1}{a} (2 a \tau + K) ^ { \frac {1}{2}} \mathbf {q} + \mathbf {x} _ {0}
$$
where $\alpha = \mathbf{SA} / \mathfrak{m}$ . If we choose the constant of integration so that the
particle starts from rest at the origin in a radiation field parallel to the x-axis, this is
$$
\begin{array}{l} t = \frac {1}{6 a} (2 a \tau + 1) ^ { \frac {3}{2}} + \frac {1}{2 a} (2 a \tau + 1) ^ { \frac {1}{2}} - \frac {2}{3 a} \\ x = \frac {1}{6 a} (2 a \tau + 1) ^ { \frac {3}{2}} - \frac {1}{2 a} (2 a \tau + 1) ^ { \frac {1}{2}} + \frac {1}{3 a} \\ \mathbf {y} = 0 \\ z = 0. \\ \end{array}
$$
(The solution here follows that of Robertson and Noonan, pp. 116-118.)