Problem 5.13. A thermally-conducting black sphere with a thermometer attached moves with velocity $\mathbf{v}$ through a black body radiation field of temperature $\mathbf{T}_0$ . What does the thermometer read?

## Solution

Solution 5.13. An observer on the sphere sees the black body spectrum doppler shifted by different amounts in different directions. Since the black body spectrum has $\mathrm{I}_{\nu} / \nu^{3} = \text{constant} \times (\mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{h}\nu / \mathrm{KT}} - 1)^{-1}$ , and since $\mathrm{I}_{\nu} / \nu^{3}$ is a Lorentz invariant, the effect of a doppler shift $\nu_{0} \rightarrow \nu$ is just to change the effective temperature $\mathrm{T}_{0} \rightarrow \mathrm{T} = \mathrm{T}_{0}(\nu / \nu_{0})$ .
What is the doppler shift seen by the comoving observer when he looks at an angle $\theta$ to the forward direction of motion? This standard result is easy to rederive with invariants: Let $\mathbf{u}$ be the 4-velocity of the sphere, $\mathbf{u}_0$ be the rest 4-velocity of the radiation, and $\mathbf{p}$ be the 4-momentum of a photon in units of Planck's constant. Then $\nu = -\mathbf{u} \cdot \mathbf{p}$ , $\nu_0 = -\mathbf{u}_0 \cdot \mathbf{p}$ and $(1 - v^2)^{-\frac{1}{2}} \equiv \gamma = -\mathbf{u} \cdot \mathbf{u}_0$ . In the sphere's frame,
$$
\mathbf {u} = (1, \underline {{0}}), \quad \mathbf {u} _ {0} = (\gamma , - \gamma \underline {{v}}), \quad \mathbf {p} = (\nu , \nu \underline {{n}})
$$
where $\underline{\mathbf{n}}$ is a unit 3-vector. The unit spatial vector in the direction of $\underline{\mathbf{v}}$ is
$$
\left(0, \frac {\underline {{v}}}{| v |}\right) = - \frac {u _ {0} + (u _ {0} \cdot u) u}{\gamma v}.
$$
(This is verified by substituting in components in the sphere's frame.) Similarly, the vector $(0,\underline{n})$ is invariantly written as
$$
(0, \underline {{\mathbf {n}}}) = \frac {\mathbf {p} + (\mathbf {u} \cdot \mathbf {p}) \mathbf {u}}{\nu},
$$
so the angle of the photon in the sphere's frame is
$$
\cos \theta = (0, \underline {{n}}) \cdot \left(0, \frac {\underline {{v}}}{| v |}\right) = \frac {\nu_ {0} - \gamma \nu}{\gamma v \nu}.
$$
The last line is obtained by dotting together the invariant 4-vector expressions and using $\nu = -\mathbf{u} \cdot \mathbf{p}$ etc. Solving for $\nu / \nu_0$ , we have
$$
\frac {\mathbf {T}}{\mathbf {T} _ {0}} = \frac {\nu}{\nu_ {0}} = \frac {\mathbf {1}}{\gamma (\mathbf {1} + \mathbf {v} \cos \theta)}.
$$
Finally, the equilibrium temperature is given by the average over all directions $< \mathrm{T}(\theta)^{4} >^{\frac{1}{4}}$ . [This is because the radiation rate, which equals the absorption rate in equilibrium, goes as $\mathbf{T}^{4}$ (Stefan-Boltzman law).]
Thus
$$
\left\langle \frac {T}{T _ {0}} \right\rangle^ {4} = \frac {1}{2} \int_ {\cos \theta = - 1} ^ {\cos \theta = 1} \frac {d (\cos \theta)}{\gamma^ {4} (1 + v \cos \theta) ^ {4}} = \frac {1}{\gamma^ {4}} \frac {1}{6 v} \left[ \frac {1}{(1 - v) ^ {3}} - \frac {1}{(1 + v) ^ {3}} \right]
$$
and
$$
\mathrm {T} _ { \text {e qu il ib ri um}} = <   \mathrm {T} ^ {4} > ^ { \frac {1}{4}} = (\gamma^ {2} (1 + \mathrm {v} ^ {2} / 3)) ^ { \frac {1}{4}} \mathrm {T} _ {0}.
$$