Problem 6.10. Find the most general form for a spacetime metric that is (spatially) spherically symmetric.

## Solution

Solution 6.10. A geometrical object exhibits a particular group symmetry if its functional change (i.e. its change in functional form) under the action
of the group vanishes. If $\xi$ is an infinitesimal displacement, then under the infinitesimal coordinate transformation $\mathbf{x}'^{\mu} = \mathbf{x}^{\mu} + \xi^{\mu}$ , one can easily show that the functional change of the metric, $\overline{\delta}\mathbf{g}_{\mu \nu}$ , is
$$
\overline {{{\delta}}} \mathbf {g} _ {\mu \nu} \equiv \mathbf {g} _ {\mu \nu} ^ {\prime} (\mathbf {x}) - \mathbf {g} _ {\mu \nu} (\mathbf {x}) = - \mathbf {g} _ {\mu \rho} \xi_ {, \nu} ^ {\rho} - \mathbf {g} _ {\rho \nu} \xi_ {, \mu} ^ {\beta} - \mathbf {g} _ {\mu \nu , \rho} \xi^ {\rho}. \qquad (1)
$$
(See Problem 13.12.) For spherical symmetry, $\overline{\delta}\mathbf{g}_{\mu \nu}$ must vanish under the rotation group, a particular realization of which is obtained from the generators
$$
\xi^ {0} = 0, \quad \xi^ {\mathrm {i}} = \varepsilon^ {\mathrm {i j}} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {j}}, \tag {2}
$$
where $\varepsilon^{\mathrm{ij}} = -\varepsilon^{\mathrm{ji}}$ are three arbitrary infinitesimal constants. Substituting Equation (2) for the generators $\xi^{\mu}$ in Equation (1) and setting the left side to zero, one gets:
a. $\mu = \nu = 0$
$$
\mathbf {g} _ {0 0, \mathrm {i}} \varepsilon^ {\mathrm {i j}} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {j}} = 0 \quad \text {o r} \quad \mathbf {g} _ {0 0, \mathrm {i}} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {j}} = \mathbf {g} _ {0 0, \mathrm {j}} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {i}}
$$
and hence
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathbf {g} _ {0 0} = \mathbf {g} _ {0 0} (\mathbf {x} ^ {0}, \mathbf {r} ^ {2}) \\ r ^ {2} \equiv (x ^ {1}) ^ {2} + (x ^ {2}) ^ {2} + (x ^ {3}) ^ {2}. \tag {3a} \\ \end{array}
$$
b. $\mu = 0, \nu \neq 0$
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathbf {g} _ {0 \mathrm {i}} \varepsilon^ {\mathrm {i j}} + \mathbf {g} _ {0 \mathrm {j}, \mathrm {i}} \varepsilon^ {\mathrm {i k}} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathrm {k}} = 0 \\ \mathrm {g} _ {0 \mathrm {j}} = \Gamma_ {1} \left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2}, \mathrm {x} ^ {0}\right) \mathrm {x} ^ {\mathrm {j}} \tag {3b} \\ \end{array}
$$
where $\Gamma_{1}$ is an arbitrary function.
c. $\mu \neq 0$ ， $\nu \neq 0$
$$
\begin{array}{l} \mathbf {g} _ {\mathbf {i k}} \varepsilon^ {\mathbf {k j}} + \mathbf {g} _ {\mathbf {\ell j}} \varepsilon^ {\mathbf {\ell i}} + \mathbf {g} _ {\mathbf {i j}, \ell} \varepsilon^ {\mathbf {\ell k}} \mathbf {x} ^ {\mathbf {k}} = 0 \\ \mathbf {g} _ {\mathbf {i j}} = \Gamma_ {2} \left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2}, \mathrm {x} ^ {0}\right) \delta_ {\mathbf {i j}} + \Gamma_ {3} \left(\mathrm {r} ^ {2}, \mathrm {x} ^ {0}\right) \mathrm {x} ^ {\mathrm {i}} \mathrm {x} ^ {\mathrm {j}} \tag {3c} \\ \end{array}
$$
where $\Gamma_{2}$ and $\Gamma_{3}$ are again arbitrary functions.
From Equation (2) one can see that the above coordinate system $(\mathbf{x}^0, \mathbf{x}^1, \mathbf{x}^2, \mathbf{x}^3)$ is “cartesian-like.” The group theoretically defined property of spherical symmetry is coordinate independent, however, and to find $\mathbf{g}_{\mu \nu}$ in any other coordinate system one merely transforms the metric given in Equations (3) in the usual way.