Problem 8.8. A 3-surface in spacetime is spacelike, timelike, or null, if its normal vector is timelike, spacelike, or null respectively. It is desired to find three orthogonal linearly independent vectors in a 3-surface. Show that for a spacelike surface, these are all spacelike; for a timelike surface,
two spacelike and one timelike; for a null surface, one null and two spacelike.

## Solution

Solution 8.8. At any point on the surface choose a local orthonormal tetrad $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{x}}}, \mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{x}}}, \mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{y}}}, \mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{z}}}$ . If the surface is spacelike, we can choose the tetrad so that $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{x}}}$ is the unit normal. The 3 orthogonal, linearly independent vectors lying in the surface are then spacelike $(\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{x}}}, \mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{y}}}, \mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{z}}})$ . Now any other orthonormal tetrad we might have chosen is related to the first one by a Lorentz transformation, which does not affect whether a vector is spacelike or not. Hence the three vectors are always spacelike when the surface is spacelike.
In the null case, choose $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{t}}} + \mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{x}}}$ to be normal to the surface. A null vector is orthogonal to itself, so the 3 orthogonal vectors in the surface are $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{y}}}$ and $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{z}}}$ (spacelike) and $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{t}}} + \mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{x}}}$ (null). In the timelike case, choose $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{x}}}$ to be normal. Then in the surface, $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{t}}}$ is timelike; $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{y}}}$ and $\mathbf{e}_{\hat{\mathbf{z}}}$ are spacelike. Again these results are unchanged by Lorentz transformations.